HOW	TO	HACK
HACKING	SECRETS	EXPOSED
A	BEGINNER’S	GUIDE
	
By:	Srikanth	Ramesh
howtohack.gohacking.com
	
Copyright	Notice
This	book	shall	not	be	copied	or	reproduced	unless	you	have	obtained	specific
permissions	for	the	same	from	the	author	
Srikanth	Ramesh
.	Any	unauthorized	use,
distribution	or	reproduction	of	this	eBook	is	strictly	prohibited.
	
Liability	Disclaimer
The	information	provided	in	this	book	is	to	be	used	for	educational	purposes	only.
The	creator	of	this	book	is	in	no	way	responsible	for	any	misuse	of	the	information
provided.	All	of	the	information	presented	in	this	book	is	meant	to	help	the	reader
develop	a	hacker	defence	attitude	so	as	to	prevent	the	attacks	discussed.	In	no	way
shall	the	information	provided	here	be	used	to	cause	any	kind	of	damage	directly	or
indirectly.	The	word	“Hack”	or	“Hacking”	used	extensively	throughout	this	book
shall	be	regarded	as	“Ethical	Hack”	or	“Ethical	hacking”	respectively.
You	implement	all	the	information	provided	in	this	book	at	your	own	risk.
	
©	Copyright	2014	by	Srikanth	Ramesh.	All	rights	reserved.

	
Table	of	Contents
PREFACE
Chapter	1	-	Introduction
WHAT	IS	HACKING?
HACKER	CLASSIFICATION
ESSENTIAL	TERMINOLOGIES
HACKING	FAQS
Chapter	2	-	Essential	Concepts
COMPUTER	NETWORK
NETWORK	HOST
NETWORK	PROTOCOL
NETWORK	PORT
NETWORK	PACKET
DOMAIN	NAME	SYSTEM	(DNS)
FIREWALL
PROXY	SERVER
Chapter	3	-	Introduction	to	Linux
WHY	LINUX?
WINDOWS	VS.	LINUX
CHOOSING	A	LINUX	DISTRIBUTION
RUNNING	LINUX	FROM	A	LIVE	DISK
LINUX	BASICS
FURTHER	REFERENCES
Chapter	4	-	Programming
WHY	PROGRAMMING?
WHERE	SHOULD	I	START?
Chapter	5	-	Footprinting
WHAT	IS	FOOTPRINTING?
INFORMATION	GATHERING	METHODOLOGY
COUNTERMEASURES
Chapter	6	-	Scanning
DETECTING	LIVE	SYSTEMS
TYPES	OF	SCANNING
TOOLS	FOR	SCANNING
OS	FINGERPRINTING
CONCEALING	YOUR	IDENTITY
COUNTERMEASURES
Chapter	7	-	Hacking	Passwords
DICTIONARY	ATTACK
BRUTE-FORCE	ATTACK
RAINBOW	TABLE
PHISHING	ATTACK

COUNTERMEASURES
Chapter	8	-	Hacking	Windows
GAINING	ACCESS	TO	THE	SYSTEM
DUMPING	THE	PASSWORD	HASHES
CRACKING	THE	WINDOWS	PASSWORD
COUNTERMEASURES
Chapter	9	-	Malware
MALWARE	VARIANTS	AND	COMMON	TECHNIQUES
COUNTERMEASURES
Chapter	10	-	Hiding	Information
WINDOWS	HIDDEN	ATTRIBUTE
NTFS	ALTERNATE	DATA	STREAMS
STEGANOGRAPHY
USING	TOOLS	FOR	HIDING	INFORMATION
Chapter	11	-	Sniffing
TYPES	OF	SNIFFING
TECHNIQUES	FOR	ACTIVE	SNIFFING
DNS	CACHE	POISONING
MAN-IN-THE-MIDDLE	ATTACK
TOOLS	FOR	SNIFFING
COUNTERMEASURES
Chapter	12	-	Denial	of	Service
WHAT	IS	DENIAL	OF	SERVICE	(DOS)	ATTACK?
DISTRIBUTED	DENIAL	OF	SERVICE	(DDOS)	ATTACK
COUNTERMEASURES
Chapter	13	-	Wireless	Hacking
WIRELESS	NETWORK	BASICS
WIRELESS	SNIFFING
WIRED	EQUIVALENT	PRIVACY	(WEP)
WI-FI	PROTECTED	ACCESS	(WPA)
DENIAL	OF	SERVICE	(DOS)	ATTACKS
COUNTERMEASURES
Chapter	14	-	Web	Application	Vulnerabilities
WEB	APPLICATION	BASICS
TYPES	OF	WEB	APPLICATION	VULNERABILITIES
TOOLS	FOR	VULNERABILITY	SCANNING
Chapter	15	-	Hacking	Internet	Users
COMMON	HACKING	TECHNIQUES
CONCLUSION

PREFACE
	
Congratulations	on	your	purchase	of	“
Hacking	Secrets	Exposed:	A	Beginner’s	Guide
“.
This	book	will	take	you	through	the	concepts	of	computer	hacking	in	a	very	simple	and
easy	to	follow	manner	so	that	even	the	readers	with	no	prior	knowledge	of	hacking	should
be	able	to	easily	understand	the	concept.	To	start	off,	all	you	need	is	a	little	working
knowledge	of	computers,	operating	system	(Windows)	and	an	Internet	connection.
Many	of	the	popular	books	that	I	have	read	on	ethical	hacking	are	mostly	suitable	only	for
those	who	already	have	a	considerable	amount	of	knowledge	in	the	field.	Also,	these
books	dive	too	much	into	the	theory	part	presenting	the	reader	with	lots	of	unnecessary
explanation,	thereby	adding	to	the	bulk	of	the	book.	This	may	cause	the	reader	to
gradually	lose	interest	in	the	book	or	quit	reading	in	the	mid	way.
So,	I	decided	to	come	up	with	a	book	that	demands	no	prior	knowledge	of	the	topic	and	is
easy	for	the	readers	to	follow	and	comprehend	at	every	point.	Instead	of	stuffing	the	book
with	conventional	paragraphing	kind	of	content,	I	prefer	to	present	the	topics	in	an	easy	to
follow	manner	by	including	bullet	points,	illustrations	and	practical	examples.	This	may
keep	the	book	slender	but	it	still	manages	to	effectively	appeal	to	the	reader’s	quest	for
knowledge.	I	have	also	decided	to	drop	obsolete	concepts	and	techniques	from	the	book
and	only	keep	those	that	are	active	and	feasible	in	the	present	day	scenario.
When	you	finish	reading	this	book,	you	should	be	able	to	apply	the	knowledge	and	skills
that	you	have	gained	in	many	ways:
	
You	can	
adopt	the	hacker’s	mindset
	and	start	to	think	and	react	to	situations	and
problems	just	like	the	hacker	would	do.	After	all,	hacking	is	just	a	mindset	more	than
a	skill	set!	
	
You	should	easily	be	able	to	
protect	yourself
	from	all	those	wicked	hackers	out	there
by	maintaining	the	security	of	your	online	accounts,	web	server	or	your	own	personal
computer.
	
This	book	
lays	the	foundation
	required	to	start	off	your	career	as	an	ethical	hacker
where	you	can	begin	to	apply	the	knowledge	and	skills	in	your	profession.	
	
HOW	TO	USE	THIS	BOOK?
This	book	will	cover	the	concepts	of	computer	hacking	for	both	
Windows
	and	
Linux
operating	systems.	For	Windows	based	practical	examples	and	illustrations,	I	have	used
my	
Windows	8.1
	PC.	For	Linux	based	examples	I	have	used	
Kali	Linux	1.0.9a
	live
DVD.	Since	most	examples	are	not	specific	of	the	operating	system	version,	you	can
implement	them	on	any	version	of	Windows	and	Linux	installed	on	your	computer.	
Each	chapter	including	all	the	concepts	presented	in	this	book	are	laid	out	in	a	hierarchical

manner	where	one	concept	forms	the	foundation	for	the	other.	This	may	not	be	true	for
every	chapter	but	in	many	cases	the	concepts	discussed	in	the	earlier	part	of	the	book	may
seem	to	form	the	key	elements	in	understanding	the	subsequent	concepts.	Therefore,	I
recommend	reading	this	book	in	an	orderly	manner	and	not	skip	the	concepts	or	chapters
in	between.
Throughout	this	book,	you	will	be	presented	with	many	illustrative	examples,	analogies
and	eye-catching	diagrams	that	will	not	only	make	the	whole	understanding	process
easier,	but	also	makes	the	learning	process	a	fun!	I	hope	you	like	this	book	and	enjoy	the
concepts	presented	in	it.

Chapter	1	-	Introduction
	
I	bet	most	of	you	are	really	excited	to	get	started.	But,	before	we	actually	move	on	to
learning	how	to	hack,	let	us	begin	to	understand	what	hacking	really	means.
	

WHAT	IS	HACKING?
In	the	field	of	computer	security,	hacking	simply	refers	to	the	act	of	exploiting	the
weakness	that	exists	in	a	computer	system	or	a	computer	network.
In	other	works,	a	hacker	is	someone	who	has	developed	a	deeper	interest	in	understanding
how	the	computer	system	or	the	software	program	works,	so	that	he	can	take	control	of	the
computer	by	exploiting	any	of	the	existing	vulnerabilities	in	it.
	

HACKER	CLASSIFICATION
Based	on	the	attitude	and	skill	level	they	possess,	hackers	are	classified	into	the	following
types:
	
White	Hat
	Hacker
:	A	
white	hat
	hacker	(also	known	as	
ethical	hacker
)	is	someone
who	uses	his	skills	only	for	defensive	purposes	such	as	penetration	testing.	These
type	of	hackers	are	often	hired	by	many	organizations	in	order	to	ensure	the	security
of	their	information	systems.
	
Black	Hat
	Hacker
:		A	
black	hat
	hacker	(also	known	as	
cracker
)	is	someone	who
always	uses	his	skills	for	offensive	purposes.	The	intention	of	black	hat	hackers	is	to
gain	money	or	take	personal	revenge	by	causing	damage	to	information	systems.
	
Grey	Hat
	Hacker
:		A	
grey	hat
	hacker	is	someone	who	falls	in	between	the	
white	hat
and	
black	hat
	category.	This	type	of	hacker	may	use	his	skills	both	for	defensive	and
offensive	purposes.
Script	Kiddie
:	A	
script	kiddie
	is	a	wannabe	hacker.	These	are	the	ones	who	lack	the
knowledge	of	how	a	computer	system	really	works	but	use	ready-made	programs,
tools	and	scripts	to	break	into	computers.
	

ESSENTIAL	TERMINOLOGIES
Before	proceeding	further,	the	following	are	some	of	the	essential	terminologies	in	the
field	of	hacking	that	one	should	be	aware	of:
	
Vulnerability:	
A	
vulnerability
	is	an	existing	weakness	that	can	allow	the	attacker	to
compromise	the	security	of	the	system.
	
Exploit:
	An	
exploit
	is	a	defined	way	(piece	of	software,	set	of	commands	etc.)	that
takes	advantage	of	an	existing	vulnerability	to	breach	the	security	of	an	IT	system.
	
Threat:	
A	
threat
	is	a	possible	danger	that	can	exploit	an	existing	vulnerability	to
cause	possible	harm.
	
Attack:	
An	
attack
	is	any	action	that	violates	the	security	of	the	system.	In	other
words,	it	is	an	assault	on	the	system	security	that	is	derived	from	an	existing	threat.
	

HACKING	FAQS
Here	is	a	small	list	of	some	of	the	
frequently	asked	questions
	about	hacking:
	
How	long	does	it	take	to	become	a	hacker?
Hacking	is	not	something	that	can	be	mastered	overnight.	It	really	takes	quite	some	time
to	understand	and	implement	the	skills	that	actually	put	you	in	the	hacker’s	shoes.
So,	for	anyone	who	is	wanting	to	become	a	hacker,	all	it	takes	is	some	creativity,
willingness	to	learn	and	perseverance.
	
What	skills	do	I	need	to	become	a	hacker?
I
n	order	to	become	a	hacker,	it	is	essential	to	have	a	basic	understanding	of	how	a
computer	system	works.	For	example,	you	may	start	off	with	basics	of	operating	system,
computer	networks	and	some	programming.
At	this	point	in	time,	you	need	not	worry	much	about	this	question	as	this	book	will	take
you	through	all	those	necessary	concepts	to	establish	the	skills	that	you	need	to	possess	as
a	hacker.
	
What	is	the	best	way	to	learn	hacking?
As	said	earlier,	the	best	way	to	learn	hacking	is	to	start	off	with	the	basics.	Once	you	have
established	the	basic	skills,	you	can	take	it	even	further	by	going	through	the	books	that
discuss	individual	topics	in	a	much	detailed	fashion.	Do	not	forget	the	power	of	Internet
when	it	comes	to	acquiring	and	expanding	your	knowledge.

Chapter	2	-	Essential	Concepts
	
Now,	let	us	begin	to	understand	some	of	the	basic	concepts	that	are	essential	in	laying	the
groundwork	for	our	journey	of	learning	how	to	hack.	Before	actually	jumping	into	the
hands-on	approach,	it	is	highly	necessary	for	one	to	have	a	thorough	understanding	of	the
basics	of	computer	network	and	their	working	model.	In	this	chapter	you	will	find	a	brief
description	of	various	concepts	and	terminologies	related	to	computer	networks,
encryption	and	security.
	

COMPUTER	NETWORK
A	
computer	network
	is	a	group	of	two	or	more	computers	linked	together	so	that
communication	between	individual	computers	is	made	possible.	Some	of	the	common
types	of	computer	network	include:
	
Local	Area	Network	(LAN)
This	is	a	type	of	computer	network	where	interconnected	computers	are	situated	very
close	to	each	other	say	for	example,	inside	the	same	building.
	
Wide	Area	Network	(WAN)
This	is	a	type	of	computer	network	where	interconnected	computers	are	separated	by	a
large	distance	(a	few	km	to	few	hundreds	of	km)	and	are	connected	using	telephone	lines
or	radio	waves.
	
Internet
The	
Internet
	is	the	largest	network	which	interconnects	various	LANs	and	WANs.	It	is	a
global	system	of	various	interconnected	computer	networks	belonging	to	government	or
private	organizations.
	

NETWORK	HOST
A	
network	host	
(or	simply	referred	to	as	a	host)	can	be	any	computer	or	network	device
connected	to	the	computer	network.	This	computer	can	be	a	terminal	or	a	web	server
offering	services	to	its	clients.
	

NETWORK	PROTOCOL													
A	
network	protocol
	(or	just	referred	to	as	protocol)	is	a	set	of	rules	and	conventions	that
are	necessary	for	the	communication	between	two	network	devices.	For	example,	two
computers	on	a	network	can	communicate	only	if	they	agree	to	follow	the	protocols.
The	following	are	some	of	the	most	widely	referred	network	protocols:
	
Internet	Protocol	(IP	Address)
An	
Internet	Protocol
	address	(
IP
	address)	is	a	unique	number	assigned	to	each	computer
or	device	(such	as	printer)	so	that	each	of	them	can	be	uniquely	identified	on	the	network.
	
Types	of	IP	Address:
	
Private	IP	Address:
	A	
private	IP	address
	is	the	one	that	is	assigned	to	a	computer	on	the
Local	Area	Network	(LAN).	A	typical	example	of	private	IP	address	would	be	something
like:
192.168.0.2
	
Public	IP	Address:
	A	
public	IP	address
	is	the	one	that	is	assigned	to	a	computer
connected	to	the	Internet.	An	example	public	IP	address	would	be	something	like:
59.93.115.125
	
In	most	cases	a	computer	gets	connected	to	the	ISP	network	using	a	private	IP.	Once	a
computer	is	on	the	ISP	network	it	will	be	assigned	a	public	IP	address	using	which	the
communication	with	the	Internet	is	made	possible.
	
How	to	Find	the	IP	Address	of	a	Computer?
Finding	your	public	IP	is	extremely	simple.	Just	type	“what	is	my	IP”	on	Google	to	see
your	public	IP	address	displayed	in	search	results.
	
Figure	2.	1
	
In	order	to	find	your	private	IP,	just	open	the	command	prompt	window	(type	
cmd
	in	the
“Run”	box)	and	enter	the	following	command:

ipconfig/all
	
Figure	2.	2
	
This	will	display	a	long	list	of	details	about	your	computer’s	network	devices	and	their
configuration.	To	see	your	private	IP	address,	just	scroll	down	to	find	something	as	“IPv4
Address”	which	is	nothing	but	your	private	IP.
Figure	2.	3
	
Hyper	Text	Transfer	Protocol	(HTTP)
The	
Hyper	Text	Transfer	Protocol	
provides	a	standard	for	communication	between	web
browsers	and	the	server.	It	is	one	of	the	most	widely	used	protocol	on	the	Internet	for
requesting	documents	such	as	web	pages	and	images.
Example:
	
http://www.example.com
	
File	Transfer	Protocol	(FTP)
The	
File	Transfer	Protocol
	provides	a	standard	for	transferring	files	between	two
computers	on	the	network.	FTP	is	most	widely	used	in	carrying	out	upload/download
operations	between	a	server	and	a	workstation.
Example:
ftp://www.example.com
	
Simple	Main	Transfer	Protocol	(SMTP)
The	
Simple	Mail	Transfer	Protocol
	provides	a	standard	for	sending	e-mails	from	one
server	to	another.	Most	e-mail	systems	that	send	mail	over	the	Internet	use	SMTP	to
exchange	messages	between	the	server.
	
Telnet
Telnet
	is	a	network	protocol	that	allows	you	to	connect	to	remote	hosts	on	the	Internet	or
on	a	local	network.	It	requires	a	telnet	client	software	to	implement	the	protocol	using
which	the	connection	is	established	with	the	remote	computer.
In	most	cases	telnet	requires	you	to	have	a	
username
	and	a	
password
	to	establish
connection	with	the	remote	host.	Occasionally,	some	hosts	also	allow	users	to	make

connection	as	a	
guest
	or	
public
.
After	the	connection	is	made,	one	can	use	text	based	commands	to	communicate	with	the
remote	host.	The	syntax	for	using	the	telnet	command	is	as	follows:
telnet	<hostname	or	IP>	port
	
Example:
telnet	127.0.0.1	25
	
SSH	(Secure	Shell)
SSH
	is	a	protocol	similar	to	telnet	which	also	facilitates	connection	to	remote	hosts	for
communication.	However,	SSH	has	an	upper	hand	over	telnet	in	terms	of	security.	Telnet
was	primarily	designed	to	operate	within	the	local	network	and	hence	does	not	take	care	of
security.	On	the	other	hand	SSH	manages	to	offer	total	security	while	connecting	to
remote	hosts	on	a	remote	network	or	Internet.
Akin	to	telnet	SSH	also	uses	a	client	software	and	requires	a	
username
	and	
password
	to
establish	connection	with	the	remote	host.
	

NETWORK	PORT
A	computer	may	be	running	several	services	on	it	like	HTTP	(web	server),	SMTP,	FTP
and	so	on.	Each	of	these	services	are	uniquely	identified	by	a	number	called	
network	port
(or	simply	referred	to	as	
port
).	If	a	computer	wants	to	avail	a	specific	service	from	another
computer,	it	has	to	establish	a	connection	to	it	on	the	exact	port	number	where	the
intended	service	is	running.
For	example,	if	a	terminal	is	to	request	a	web	document	from	a	remote	server	using	HTTP,
it	has	to	first	establish	a	connection	with	the	remote	server	on	port	80	(HTTP	service	runs
on	port	80)	before	placing	the	request.
In	simple	words,	port	numbers	can	be	compared	to	door	numbers	where	each	door	grants
access	to	a	specific	service	on	a	computer.	The	following	table	shows	a	list	of	popular
services	and	their	default	port	numbers:
	
	
	
Name	of	Service/Protocol
	
	
Port	Number
	
	
HTTP
	
	
80
	
	
FTP
	
	
21
	
	
SMTP
	
	
25
	
	
TELNET
	
	
23
	
	
SSH
	
	
22
Table	2.	1
	

NETWORK	PACKET
A	
network	packet
	(data	packet,	datagram	or	simply	called	as	packet)	is	a	basic	unit	of	data
sent	from	one	host	to	another	over	a	network.	When	data	(such	as	a	mail,	message	or	a
file)	has	to	be	transmitted	between	two	hosts,	it	is	fragmented	into	small	structures	called
packets	and	are	reassembled	at	the	destination	to	make	the	original	data	chunk.
Each	packet	consists	of	the	fragmented	data	along	with	the	necessary	information	that	will
help	it	get	to	its	destination	such	as	the	
sender’s	IP
	address,	intended	
receiver’s	IP
	address,
target	port
	number,	the	
total	number	of	packets
	the	original	data	chunk	has	been	broken
into	and	the	
sequence		number
	of	the	particular	packet.
	

DOMAIN	NAME	SYSTEM	(DNS)
A	
Domain	Name	System
	or	
Domain	Name	Service
	(DNS)	is	a	network	protocol	whose	job
is	to	map	domain	names	such	as	“gohacking.com”	to	its	corresponding	IP	address	like
“104.28.6.51”.
Since	Internet	is	the	mother	of	millions	of	computers		each	having	a	unique	IP	address,	it
becomes	impossible	for	people	to	remember	the	IP	address	of	each	and	every	computer
they	want	to	access.	So,	in	order	to	make	this	process	simpler	the	concept	of	domain
names	was	introduced.	As	a	result	users	can	easily	access	any	website	just	by	typing	their
domain	names	in	the	browser’s	address	bas	such	as	“google.com”	or	“yahoo.com”	without
having	to	remember	their	actual	IP	addresses.
However,	since	the	network	protocol	understands	only	the	IP	address	and	not	the	domain
names,	it	is	necessary	to	translate	the	domain	name	back	to	its	corresponding	IP	address
before	establishing	a	connection	with	the	target	server.	This	is	where	DNS	comes	in
handy.
Your	Internet	Service	Provider	has	a	DNS	server	which	maintains	a	huge	record	of
existing	domain	names	and	their	corresponding	IP	addresses.	Each	time	you	type	the	URL
such	as	“http://www.google.com”	on	your	browser’s	address	bar,	your	computer	will	use
the	DNS	server	from	the	ISP	and	translates	the	domain	name	“google.com”	to	its
corresponding	IP	address	to	make	a	connection	with	the	Google’s	server.	All	this	process
will	happen	in	a	split	second	behind	the	scenes	and	hence	goes	unnoticed.
	
How	DNS	Works?
Let	us	understand	the	working	of	
Domain	Name	System
	using	the	following	example:
Whenever	you	type	a	URL	such	as	“http://www.gohacking.com”	on	your	browser’s
address	bar,	your	computer	will	send	a	request	to	the	
local	name	server
	(the	ISP	DNS
server)	to	resolve	the	domain	name	to	its	corresponding	IP	address.	This	request	is	often
referred	to	as	a	
DNS	query
.
The	local	name	server	will	receive	the	query	to	find	out	whether	it	contains	the	matching
name	and	IP	address	in	its	database.	If	found,	the	corresponding	IP	address	(response)	is
returned.	If	not,	the	query	is	automatically	passed	on	to	another	DNS	server	that	is	in	the
next	higher	level	of	DNS	hierarchy.	This	process	continues	until	the	query	reaches	the
DNS	server	that	contains	the	matching	name	and	IP	address.	The	IP	address	(response)
then	flows	back	the	chain	in	the	reverse	order	to	your	computer.	The	following	figure	2.4
illustrates	the	above	process.
	

Figure	2.	4
	

FIREWALL
Firewalls	are	basically	a	barrier	between	your	computer	(or	a	network)	and	the	Internet
(outside	world).	A	firewall	can	be	simply	compared	to	a	security	guard	who	stands	at	the
entrance	of	your	house	and	filters	the	visitors	coming	to	your	place.	He	may	allow	some
visitors	to	enter	while	deny	others	whom	he	suspects	of	being	intruders.	Similarly	a
firewall	is	a	software	program	or	a	hardware	device	that	filters	the	information
(packets)	coming	through	the	Internet	to	your	personal	computer	or	a	computer	network.
	
How	Firewall	Works?
Firewalls	may	decide	to	allow	or	block	network	traffic	between	devices	based	on	the	rules
that	are	pre-configured	or	set	by	the	firewall	administrator.	Most	personal	firewalls	such	as
Windows	firewall	operate	on	a	set	of	pre-configured	rules	which	are	most	suitable	under
normal	circumstances,	so	that	the	user	need	not	worry	much	about	configuring	the
firewall.	The	operation	of	firewall	is	illustrated	in	the	below	figure	2.5.
	
Figure	2.	5
	
Personal	firewalls	are	easy	to	install	and	use	and	hence	preferred	by	end-users	to	secure
their	personal	computers.	However,	in	order	to	meet	customized	needs	large	networks	and
companies	prefer	those	firewalls	that	have	plenty	of	options	to	configure.
For	example,	a	company	may	set	up	different	firewall	rules	for	FTP	servers,	telnet
servers	and	web	servers.	In	addition,	the	company	can	even	control	how	the	employees
connect	to	the	Internet	by	blocking	access	to	certain	websites	and	restricting	the	transfer	of
files	to	other	networks.	Thus,	in	addition	to	security,	a	firewall	can	give	the	company	a
tremendous	control	over	how	people	use	their	network.
Firewalls	use	one	or	more	of	the	following	methods	to	control	the	incoming	and	outgoing
traffic	in	a	network:
	
1
.	
Packet	Filtering:
	In	this	method,	packets	(small	chunks	of	data)	are	analyzed	against
a	set	of	
filters
.	Packet	filters	has	a	set	of	rules	that	come	with	accept	and	deny	actions
which	are	pre-configured	or	can	be	configured	manually	by	the	firewall
administrator.	If	the	packet	manages	to	make	it	through	these	filters	then	it	is	allowed
to	reach	the	destination;	otherwise	it	is	discarded.
2
.	
Stateful	Inspection:
	This	is	a	newer	method	that	doesn’t	analyze	the	contents	of	the

packets.	Instead,	it	compares	certain	key	aspects	of	each	packet	to	a	database	of
trusted	source.	Both	incoming	and	outgoing	packets	are	compared	against	this
database	and	if	the	comparison	yields	a	reasonable	match,	then	the	packets	are
allowed	to	travel	further.	Otherwise	they	are	discarded.
	
Firewall	Configuration:
Firewalls	can	be	configured	by	adding	one	or	more	filters	based	on	several	conditions	as
mentioned	below:
	
1
.	
											
IP	addresses:
	In	any	case,	if	an	IP	address	outside	the	network	is	said	to	be
unfavourable,	then	it	is	possible	to	set		filter	to	block	all	the	traffic	to	and	from
that	IP	address.	For	example,	if	a	certain	IP	address	is	found	to	be	making	too
many	connections	to	a	server,	the	administrator	may	decide	to	block
traffic	from	this	IP	using	the	firewall.
2
.	
										
Domain	names:
	Since	it	is	difficult	to	remember	the	IP	addresses,	it	is	an
easier	and	smarter	way	to	configure	the	firewalls	by	adding	filters	based	on
domain	names.	By	setting	up	a	domain	filter,	a	company	may	decide	to	block	all
access	to	certain	domain	names,	or	may	provide	access	only	to	a	list	of
selected	domain	names.
3
.	
										
Ports/Protocols:	
If	the	services	running	on	a	given	port	is	intended	for	the
public	or	network	users,	they	are	usually	kept	open.	Otherwise	they	are	blocked
using	the	firewall	so	as	to	prevent	intruders	from	using	the	open	ports	for
making	unauthorized	connections.
4
.	
										
Specific	words	or	phrases:
	A	firewall	can	be	configured	to	filter	one	or	more
specific	words	or	phrases	so	that	both	the	incoming	and	outgoing	packets	are
scanned	for	the	words	in	the	filter.
For	example,	you	may	set	up	a	firewall	rule	to	filter	any	packet	that
contains	an	offensive	term	or	a	phrase	that	you	may	decide	to	block	from
entering	or	leaving	your	network.
	
Hardware	vs.	Software	Firewall:
Hardware	firewalls	provide	higher	level	of	security	and	hence	preferred	for	servers	where
security	has	the	top	most	priority.	The	software	firewalls	on	the	other	hand	are	less
expensive	and	hence	preferred	in	home	computers	and	laptops.
Hardware	firewalls	usually	come	as	an	in-built	unit	of	a	router	and	provide	maximum
security	as	it	filters	each	packet	at	the	hardware	level	itself	even	before	it	manages	to	enter
your	computer.	A	good	example	is	the	Linksys	Cable/DSL	router.
	

PROXY	SERVER
In	a	computer	network,	a	
proxy	server
	is	any	computer	system	offering	a	service	that	acts
as	an	intermediary	between	the	two	communicating	parties,	the	client	and	the	server.
In	the	presence	of	a	proxy	server,	there	is	no	direct	communication	between	the	client	and
the	server.	Instead,	the	client	connects	to	the	proxy	server	and	sends	requests	for	resources
such	as	a	document,	web	page	or	a	file	that	resides	on	a	remote	server.	The	proxy	server
handles	this	request	by	fetching	the	required	resources	from	the	remote	server	and
forwarding	the	same	to	the	client.
	
How	Proxy	Server	Works?
An	illustration	of	how	a	proxy	server	works	is	shown	in	the	Figure	2.1.
As	shown	in	the	below	example,	whenever	the	client	connects	to	a	web	proxy	server	and
makes	a	request	for	the	resources	(in	this	case,	“Sample.html”)	that	reside	on	a	remote
server	(in	this	case,	xyz.com),	the	proxy	server	forwards	this	request	to	the	target	server	on
behalf	of	the	client	so	as	to	fetch	the	requested	resource	and	deliver	it	back	to	the	client.
An	example	of	client	can	be	a	user	operated	computer	that	is	connected	to	the	Internet.
	
Figure	2.	6
	
A	proxy	server	is	most	widely	used	to	conceal	the	IP	address	or	the	origin	of	the	Internet
users	during	their	activity.	Since	it	the	proxy	server	which	handles	the	requests	between
the	client	and	the	target,	only	the	IP	address	of	the	proxy	server	is	exposed	to	the	outside
world	and	not	the	actual	one.	Therefore,	most	hackers	use	a	proxy	server	during	the
attacks	on	their	target	so	that	it	would	be	hard	to	trace	back	to	them.

Chapter	3	-	Introduction	to	Linux
	
Linux	is	a	UNIX-like	operating	system	which	is	open-source	and	freely	available	for
download.	Compared	to	Windows	operating	system	Linux	is	more	secure,	stable,	reliable,
multi-user	capable	and	compatible	with	both	server	and	desktop	usage.	This	makes	it	one
of	the	most	popular	operating	system	next	to	Windows.
	

WHY	LINUX?
As	an	ethical	hacker,	it	is	most	essential	to	have	a	sound	understanding	of	the	Linux
platform,	its	usage	and	commands.	Linux	is	widely	recognized	as	the	“hacker’s	operating
system”	and	if	you	are	wondering	why,	the	reasons	are	below:
	
Since	it	is	a	freeware,	highly	secure	and	stable	operating	system,	millions	of	servers
on	the	Internet	runs	on	Linux.
	
Unlike	Windows	OS	which	is	built	on	graphical	user	interface	(GUI),	Linux	is	built
on	command	user	interface	(CUI)	and	thus	offers	greater	control	and	customization
options	for	hackers.
	
Some	of	the	best	hacking	scripts	and	programs	are	designed	only	for	Linux.
	

WINDOWS	VS.	LINUX
It	is	no	doubt	that	Windows	is	the	most	popular	desktop	operating	system	known	for	its
user	friendliness	and	graphical	user	interface.	As	a	result,	most	computer	users	across	the
world	are	familiar	with	the	Windows	operating	system	but	are	new	to	Linux.	If	you	are
fairly	new	to	Linux	and	are	wondering	what’s	the	difference	between	Windows	and	Linux,
here	is	a	quick	comparison	between	the	two:
Comparison	between	Windows	and	Linux
	
	
Windows
	
	
Linux
	
	
Known	for	its	user	friendliness	and	ease	of	use.
	
	
Known	for	its	security,	stability,	flexibility	and	portability.
	
	
Widely	used	for	desktop	usage	by	home	and	office
users.
	
	
Widely	used	for	server	usage	by	enterprise	and	corporations.
	
	
The	operating	system	is	mainly	based	on	graphical
user	interface	(GUI).
	
	
The	operating	system	is	mainly	based	on	command	user
interface	(CUI).
	
	
Designed	to	operate	with	only	one	user	at	a	time.
	
	
Designed	to	support	simultaneous	multi-user	operation.
	
	
More	than	70,000	viruses	are	reported	for	Windows
till	date.
	
	
Only	around	80-100	viruses	are	reported	for	Linux	till	date
and	hence	more	secure.
	
	
Since	it	is	based	on	
GUI
	it	is	easy	for	users	to	learn
and	operate.
	
	
Since	it	is	based	on	
CUI
	it	is	somewhat	difficult	for	users	to
learn	and	operate.
	
	
Comes	as	commercial	product	and	hence	available
only	on	purchase.
	
	
Comes	as	an	open-source	and	hence	freely	available.
	
	
Examples	of	Windows	based	OS	include	
Windows
2000
,	
XP
,	
Vista
,	
7
	and	
8.
	
	
Examples	of	Linux	based	OS	include	
Ubuntu
,	
Fedora
,	
Red
Hat
,	Debian
,	
CentOS
	etc.
Table	3.	1
	

CHOOSING	A	LINUX	DISTRIBUTION
A	Linux	distribution	is	a	collection	of	software	and	applications	compiled	around	the
Linux	kernel	(central	component	of	the	operating	system).	You	can	choose	from	a	wide
variety	of	Linux	distributions	like	
Ubuntu
,	
Fedora
	or	
Debian
	where	each	of	them	contain
their	own	collection	of	software	and	applications	but	shares	a	common	Linux	kernel.	As	a
beginner	you	can	choose	Ubuntu	as	it	easy	to	install	and	user	friendly.	You	can	find	the
download	link	and	installation	guide	from	the	official	Ubuntu	website	for	which	the	link	is
mentioned	below:
Official	Ubuntu	Website:
	
http://www.ubuntu.com/
	

RUNNING	LINUX	FROM	A	LIVE	DISK
There	are	two	ways	to	use	a	Linux	operating	system.	One	is	to	install	the	operating	system
on	to	the	hard	drive	just	like	you	do	it	for	the	Windows.	However,	this	method	requires	a
prior	experience	of	installing	and	configuring	the	operating	systems.	If	you	are	new	to
Linux	or	do	not	have	a	prior	experience	of	OS	installation,	you	can	use	a	live	disk	option
such	as	CD	or	DVD	to	run	and	use	Linux.	This	in	fact	is	a	good	alternative	to	installation
and	provides	an	easy	way	to	get	Linux	running	on	your	system	without	modifying	any	of
its	previous	settings	and	existing	file	system.	But	this	option	does	not	save	your	work
upon	shutting	down	your	computer	and	hence	suitable	only	for	usage	like	penetration
testing	and	learning.
One	of	my	favourite	distribution	for	hacking	and	penetration	testing	is	
Kali
	Linux.	
This	is
based	on	Debian	GNU/Linux	platform	and	comes	in	the	form	of	a	live	DVD	with	an
option	to	install	as	well.	You	can	download	the	
ISO	image
	for	the	DVD	version	freely
from	the	Kali	Linux	official	website.	The	link	to	the	website	is	given	below:
Kali	Website:
	
https://www.kali.org/downloads/
	
After	the	download	is	complete	you	can	burn	the	ISO	image	onto	the	DVD	using	a	free
program	like	
ImgBurn
.	This	should	give	you	a	bootable	live	Kali	DVD.	For	your
reference,	I	have	used	the	64-bit
	1.0.9a
	version	of	the	Kali	Linux	live	DVD	in	all	my
examples	and	demonstrations	throughout	this	book.
	

LINUX	BASICS
Linux	operating	system	was	developed	in	1991	by	
Linus	Torvalds
	when	he	was	a	student
of	Helsinki	University,	Finland.	He	posted	about	the	source	code	that	he	developed	in	the
Minix	news	group.	The	feedback	was	good	and	the	source	code	started	to	spread	around
the	world	via	FTP	and	over	the	years	Linux	became	a	very	popular	operating	system.
Today,	many	great	network	programs,	security	tools	and	servers	including	DNS,	Email
and	Web	server	are	being	developed	for	Linux	by	programmers	and	hackers	around	the
world.
	
Linux	System	Organization
The	functioning	of	Linux	is	organized	in	terms	of	the	following	layers	as	shown	in	the
Figure	below:
	
Hardware	Layer
	consists	of	the	actual	hardware	devices	like	CPU,	Memory,	Hard
Disk	Drive	etc.
	
Kernel	
is	the	core	component	which	lies	at	the	heart	of	the	operating	system	that
directly	interacts	with	the	hardware	using	the	machine	language.
	
Figure	3.	1
	
	
Shell	
(or	the	command	interpreter)	acts	as	a	mediator	that	takes	commands	from	the
user	and	then	conveys	them	to	the	kernel	which	ultimately	executes	them.
	
Tools	and	Applications
	reside	on	the	outer	crust	and	gives	user	most	of	the
functionalities	of	an	operating	system.
	
Linux	Directory	Structure

A	
directory	structure
	is	the	way	in	which	the	file	system	and	its	files	of	an	operating
system	are	displayed	to	the	user.	People	who	are	new	to	the	Linux	operating	system	and
the	structure	of	its	
File	System
	often	find	it	troublesome	and	messed	up	in	dealing	with
the	files	and	their	location.	So,	let	us	begin	to	explore	some	of	the	basic	information	about
the	Linux	File	System.
Any	standard	Linux	distribution	has	the	following	directory	structure	as	shown	below:
	
Figure	3.	2
	
Below	is	a	brief	description	of	the	purpose	and	contents	of	each	directory:
	
/	-	ROOT	Directory
Every	single	file	and	the	directory	of	the	Linux	file	system	starts	from	the	
root	directory
.
Only	“root”	user	has	the	write	privilege	to	this	directory.
	
/bin	-	Binaries
Contains	executable	binary	files	required	for	booting	and	repairing	of	the	system.	Also
contains	file	and	commands	required	to	run	in	single	user-mode	such	as:	
ls
,	
ping
,	
grep
	etc.
	
/lib	-	System	Libraries
Contains	system	libraries	and	kernel	modules	required	for	the	booting	of	the	system.
	
/dev	-	Device	Files
Contains	device	related	files	for	all	the	hardware	devices	of	the	system.
	
/etc	-	Configuration	Files

Contains	configuration	files	required	by	all	programs.	It	also	contains	
start-up
	and
shutdown
	shell	scripts	used	to	
start
	or	
stop
	individual	programs.
	
/home	-	Home	Directories
This	forms	the	“home	directory”	of	individual	users	to	store	their	personal	information.
Every	time	a	new	user	is	added,	a	new	directory	is	created	in	the	name	of	the	user	under
“/home”.
	
/user	-	User	Programs
This	directory	is	used	to	store	executable	
binaries
,	
documentation
,	
source-code
	files
and	
libraries
	for	second	level	programs.
	
/tmp	-	Temporary	Files
Contains	temporary	files	for	system	and	users.
	
/var	-	Variable	Files
Contains	files	whose	size	is	expected	to	grow.	Examples	of	such	files	include	
log	files,
print	queues
,	
lock	files
	and	
temp	files
.
	
Linux	Commands
All	commands	in	Linux	are	typed	in	lowercase	and	are	case	sensitive.	Each	Linux
command	has	to	be	typed	and	executed	in	a	window	called	“
terminal	emulator
”	or
simply	referred	to	as	a	
terminal
.	It	is	a	program	similar	to	the	
command	prompt
	of
Microsoft	Windows	where	a	user	can	run	the	commands	and	get	the	results	displayed.	A
terminal	simply	takes	the	user	commands,	passes	it	on	to	the	shell	for	execution	and
displays	the	results	back	to	the	user.
To	run	commands	in	the	terminal,	you	will	have	to	first	load	the	Linux	from	the	Live
DVD	that	you	have	created.	To	do	this,	just	insert	the	Kali	Linux	DVD	into	the	drive,	boot
from	it	and	select	the	“Live	option”.	Once	the	booting	is	completed	you	should	see	your
desktop	loaded	on	your	screen.
To	start	the	terminal	window,	just	click	
right-click
	on	the	desktop	and	select	the	option
Open	in	Terminal	
as	shown	in	the	below	snapshot	3.1:
	

Figure	3.	3
Once	the	
terminal	window
	is	loaded	you	should	be	able	to	start	typing	the	commands.	A
snapshot	of	the	
terminal	window
	is	shown	below:
	
Figure	3.	4
	
Creating	Files
There	are	two	commands	for	creating	files:	
touch
	and	
cat
.	Here	is	how	they	are	to	be
used:
#
	touch	
sample
	
This	creates	an	empty	file	called	“sample”.	If	you	want	to	create	multiple	empty	files
quickly	it	can	be	done	as	follows:
#
	touch	
sample1	sample2	sample3	sample4	sample5
	
In	order	to	store	a	few	lines	of	data	onto	the	file	just	type	the	following	command:
#
	
cat	
>
	
sample
	

When	you	press	the	
Enter
	key,	you	will	find	the	cursor	positioned	in	the	next	line	waiting
for	you	to	type	the	content	that	you	want	to	store	in	the	file	“sample”.	Just	type	in	the
following	line:
This	is	a	sample	file	containing	some	sample	text.
	
Once	you	are	done,	press	
Ctrl+D
.	This	will	save	the	contents	onto	the	file	and
automatically	take	you	back	to	the	
#
	prompt.	Now,	to	display	the	contents	of	the	file
“sample”	just	type	the	command	as	follows:
#
	cat	
sample
	
This	should	display	the	contents	of	the	file	as	shown	in	the	snapshot	below:
	
Figure	3.	5
	
Editing	Files
To	edit	a	given	file	one	has	to	use	the	vi	command.	In	order	to	edit	a	given	file	“sample”
the	command	is	as	follows:
#
	vi	
sample
	
When	you	type	the	above	command	and	hit	
Enter
,	you	should	see	the	contents	of	the	file
“sample”	displayed	in	the	vi	editor	window	as	shown	in	the	Figure	3.6:
	
Figure	3.	6
	
In	order	to	start	your	edit	process	you	need	to	enter	the	
INSERT
	mode	by	pressing	the	key
i
.	Now,	your	cursor	should	move	freely	inside	the	editor	window	allowing	you	to	make
necessary	changes	to	the	content.	Once	you	are	done	with	the	editing,	press	the	
Esc
	key.
Now	type	
:wq
	as	shown	in	the	below	snapshot	and	hit	
Enter
.	The	
w
	stands	for	
write
/
save

and	
q
	stands	for	
quit
.	This	should	save	changes	to	your	file,	close	the	vi	editor	and	take
you	back	to	the	
#
	prompt.	If	you	are	to	quit	without	saving	changes	just	type	
:q!
	instead	of
:wq	and	hit	
Enter
.
	
Figure	3.	7
Listing	Files	and	Directories
To	display	the	list	of	files	and	directories	the	command	used	is	
ls
.	
ls
	is	the	Linux
equivalent	of	
DIR
	command	in	Windows.	To	list	the	files	and	directories	just	type	the
following	command	and	hit	
Enter
.
#
	ls
	
Deleting	Files	and	Directories
In	Linux	rm	command	is	used	to	delete	files	and	directories.	To	delete	a	file	use	the
command	as	shown	below:
#
	rm	
samplefile
	
When	you	hit	
Enter
,	you	are	asked	for	delete	confirmation.	Just	type	
y
	and	hit	
Enter
again.	This	should	complete	the	deletion	of	the	file	“samplefile”.
To	delete	a	directory	and	all	its	contents	use	the	following	command:
#
	rm	
-r
	
sampledir
	
When	you	hit	
Enter
,	you	are	asked	for	a	delete	confirmation.	Just	type	
y
	and	hit	
Enter
again.	This	should	complete	the	deletion	of	the	directory	“sampledir”	and	all	the	contents
inside	it.
	
Logging	Out
Once	you	are	done	with	your	work,	you	can	close	the	terminal	window	using	the	
exit
command	as	follows:
#
	exit

	
Connecting	to	a	Remote	Host
So	far	we	have	discussed	ways	to	execute	commands	on	your	own	Linux	computer.
However,	since	Linux	is	a	multi-user	operating	system	it	is	possible	for	the	users	to
connect	to	a	computer	running	Linux	even	if	they	are	miles	away	from	its	physical
location.	In	this	section	we	will	discuss	some	of	the	ways	through	which	you	can	connect
to	a	remote	computer	and	execute	commands	on	it.
SSH
	(
Secure	Shell
)	is	the	most	popular	and	the	easiest	way	to	accomplish	this	task.	This
is	a	protocol	that	allows	a	client	to	connect	to	a	remote	host	and	carry	out	operations	on	it.
	
SSH	on	Linux
If	you	are	on	a	Linux	computer,	connecting	to	another	Linux	computer	is	very	easy.	Just
open	the	
Terminal
	window	and	type	the	following	command:
Command	Syntax:ssh
	
username@host
	
Here	
username
	means	username	of	your	account	on	the	remote	computer	and	
host
	can	be
a	
domain	name
	such	as	xyz.com	or	the	
IP	address
	of	the	remote	computer.	The	following
examples	make	it	more	clear:
#
	ssh	
john@xyz.com
	
#
	ssh	
john@66.226.71.129
	
#
	ssh	
root@xyz.com
	
#
	ssh	
root@66.226.71.129
	
If	the	user	exists	on	the	target	machine,	the	connection	will	be	established	and	you	will	be
asked	to	enter	the	
password
.	Once	you	enter	the	password	and	hit	
Enter
	(password
entered	will	be	invisible	due	to	security	reasons),	you	will	be	granted	access	to	the	target
Linux	machine	where	you	are	free	to	execute	any	command	on	it	as	discussed	in	the
previous	section.
	
SSH	on	Windows
You	can	connect	to	a	remote	Linux	machine	even	if	you	are	using	a	Windows	computer.
This	can	be	done	using	a	small	freeware	program	called	
PuTTY
	which	is	an	SSH	client
and	a	terminal	emulator	for	Windows.	You	can	download	it	from	the	link	below:
Download	PuTTY:	
http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/download.html
	
After	the	download,	double-click	on	the	application	
putty.exe
,	enter	the	
hostname
	or	
IP
address	of	the	target	machine,	select	the	
SSH
	option	and	click	on	the	button	“Open”	as
shown	in	the	below	snapshot:
	

Figure	3.	8
	
This	should	establish	the	connection	with	the	remote	Linux	machine	and	ask	you	to	enter
the	
Login	as
	(username)	followed	by	the	
password
	(will	be	invisible	due	to	security
reasons).	Once	you	have	entered	the	correct	login	details	you	will	be	able	to	execute
commands	on	the	target	machine.
	

FURTHER	REFERENCES
This	chapter	has	dealt	with	some	of	the	basic	concepts	and	command	examples	of	Linux
operating	system	so	as	to	lay	the	groundwork	for	your	further	learning.	In	order	to	emerge
as	a	professional	hacker,	it	is	necessary	to	have	a	sound	understanding	on	Linux	and
master	its	commands.	For	this	reason,	I	have	a	few	recommendations	for	your	further
references.
Here	is	a	list	of	some	of	the	useful	websites	to	expand	your	Linux	knowledge:
	
Linux	Official	Website
	
Free	Linux	Training
	
Linux	Knowledge	Base
	
Linux	Visual	Training
	
Here	is	a	list	of	some	of	the	great	books	worth	reading:
	
How	Linux	Works
	
A	Practical	Guide	to	Linux	Commands,	Editors,	and	Shell	Programming

Chapter	4	-	Programming
	
The	need	to	possess	the	knowledge	of	programming	as	a	hacker	is	one	of	the	most	debated
topics	in	the	hacker’s	community.	Even	though	the	availability	of	a	variety	of	ready-made
tools	on	the	Internet	has	considerably	eliminated	the	need	for	programming,	many	still
argue	that	having	a	knowledge	of	programming	can	be	a	great	advantage	for	the	hacker.
	

WHY	PROGRAMMING?
At	this	point	you	might	be	asking	yourself:	“Do	I	need	to	learn	programming?”	Well,	this
question	is	hard	to	answer	as	it	all	depends	on	individual	goals.	While	some	people	hate
programming	and	love	to	stick	with	readily	available	tools,	there	are	a	few	who	would	like
to	give	programming	a	try.	Remember,	it	is	still	possible	to	be	a	fairly	good	ethical	hacker
without	knowing	any	programming	at	all	provided	you	really	master	the	theoretical
concepts	of	hacking	and	know	how	to	use	the	tools	effectively.
However,	if	you	are	to	take	my	personal	advice,	I	still	recommend	that	you	learn	some
basics	of	programming	so	that	you	will	have	a	much	better	understating	of	the	situations.
A	knowledge	of	programming	can	give	you	the	following	added	benefits:
	
You	can	code	your	own	exploit	for	freshly	discovered	vulnerabilities	without	having
to	wait	for	someone	to	develop	a	tool.
	
You	can	modify	the	existing	source	code	to	meet	your	customized	needs.
	
You	will	be	regarded	as	an	elite	ethical	hacker	in	the	hacker’s	community.
	
At	last	you	can	avoid	people	classifying	you	as	a	script	kiddie.
	

WHERE	SHOULD	I	START?
If	you	are	completely	new	to	the	world	of	computer	programming,	my	recommendation	is
to	start	off	with	the	basics	such	as	learning	programming	languages	like	
C
,	
HTML
	(Hyper
Text	Markup	Language),	
PHP	
and	
JavaScript
.	C	is	a	wonderful	programming	language
for	beginners	that	plays	a	prominent	role	in	establishing	the	foundation	for	learning	other
languages.	The	following	are	some	of	the	freely	available	websites	to	learn	C:
	
C	Programming
	
Learn-C
	
C4Learn
	
Once	you	are	done	with	the	basics	of	C,	learning	HTML
,	
PHP	and	JavaScript	becomes
fairly	simple.	The	following	are	the	freely	available	websites	to	learn	HTML,	PHP	and
JavaScript:
	
HTML	Tutorial	w3schools
	
PHP	Tutorial	w3schools
	
JavaScript	Tutorial	w3schools
	
In	addition	to	free	resources	you	can	even	consider	purchasing	books	if	you	are	more
serious	about	programming.	The	following	are	few	of	the	great	books	worth	reading:
	
The	C	Programming	Language
	
HTML	&	CSS:	A	Beginner’s	Guide
	
Programming	PHP
	
JavaScript	for	Beginners
	
Once	you	have	made	up	your	mind,	you	can	start	to	learn	and	practice	programming	as	a
separate	journey	without	having	to	pause	pursuing	your	hacking	tutorials.	In	most
circumstances	ethical	hacking	or	penetration	testing	is	independent	of	programming	and
hence	you	can	learn	them	simultaneously.	If	you	are	not	yet	ready	for	programming,	you
may	even	complete	reading	this	book	and	later	decide	on	programming.

Chapter	5	-	Footprinting
	
Before	the	real	fun	of	hacking	begins,	there	comes	two	important	steps	in	the	intelligence
gathering	process	known	as	
footprinting	
and	
scanning
	to	be	performed	by	the	hacker.	This
chapter	will	deal	with	the	
first
	step	called	
footprinting
	which	simply	means	gathering
information	about	the	target.
	

WHAT	IS	FOOTPRINTING?
Footprinting
	refers	to	the	process	of	gathering	information	about	a	specific	computer
system	or	a	network	environment	and	the	company	it	belongs	to.	This	is	the	preparatory
phase	for	the	hacker	where	he	gathers	as	much	information	as	he	can	so	as	to	find	ways	to
intrude	into	the	target.	Footprinting	can	reveal	the	vulnerabilities	of	the	target	system	and
improve	the	ways	in	which	they	can	be	exploited.
Footprinting	has	to	be	done	in	a	slow	and	methodological	manner	where	the	hacker	spends
90%	of	his	time	in	blueprinting	the	security	profile	of	the	target	and	only	10%	in
launching	the	attack.	Footprinting	can	actually	help	hacker	decide	on	the	type	of	attack
that	is	most	suitable	for	the	target.
	

INFORMATION	GATHERING	METHODOLOGY
Suppose	if	a	hacker	decides	to	break	into	a	target-company,	he	can	only	do	so	after
blueprinting	the	target	and	assessing	the	possible	vulnerabilities.	Based	on	this
information,	the	hacker	can	carry	out	possible	attacks	such	as	breaking	into	the	company’s
database,	hacking	its	website	or	causing	denial	of	service.	The	following	are	some	of	the
different	types	of	information	that	a	hacker	could	gather	before	actually	carrying	out	the
attack:
	
Obtaining	the	Domain	Name	Information
Various	background	information	about	the	target	website	(domain	name)	such	as	the	name
of	its	
owner	
and	
registrar
,	
date	of	its	registration
,	
expiry	date
,	
name	servers
	associated,
contact	details	associated	with	it	such	as	
email
,	
phone
	and	
address
	can	be	found	out	by
performing	a	
Whois	lookup
.	The	following	are	some	of	the	popular	websites	where	you
can	perform	Whois	lookup	on	any	domain	to	uncover	its	background	information:
http://www.whois.com/whois/
	
https://who.is/
	
http://whois.domaintools.com/
	
A	sample	Whois	Lookup	performed	on	“facebook.com”	at	
http://www.whois.com/whois/
shows	the	following	information:
	
Figure	5.	1
Finding	IP	Address	and	Hosting	Provider
Information	such	as	the	IP	address	of	the	website	and	its	hosting	provider	can	be	very

crucial.	This	can	be	easily	found	out	using	the	following	website:
WhoIsHostingThis:	
http://www.whoishostingthis.com/
	
Just	visit	the	above	website	and	enter	the	domain	name	of	your	choice	to	obtain	its	IP
address	as	well	as	the	name	of	its	hosting	provider	as	shown	below.
	
Figure	5.	2
	
As	you	can	see	from	the	above	snapshot,	a	query	on	“facebook.com”	reveals	its	
IP
address
,	
hosting	provider
	and	also	the	
name	servers
	associated	with	it.
	
Finding	IP	Address	Location
Finding	out	the	physical	location	of	the	IP	address	is	very	simple.	Just	visit	the	following
website	and	enter	the	target	IP	address	to	reveal	its	physical	location:
IP2Location:
	
http://www.ip2location.com/demo
A	snapshot	of	sample	query	for	the	IP	address	
173.252.120.6
	on	
ip2location.com
	website
is	shown	below:
	
Figure	5.	3
	

Finding	IP	Address	Range
While	small	websites	may	have	a	single	IP	address,	big	players	such	as	Google,	Facebook
and	Microsoft	have	a	range	of	IP	addresses	allocated	to	their	company	for	hosting
additional	websites	and	servers.	This	range	of	information	can	be	obtained	from	the
official	website	of	
American	Registry	for	Internet	Numbers	(ARIN)
.	The	URL	for	the
ARIN	website	is	listed	below:
ARIN	Website:	
https://www.arin.net/
	
Visit	the	above	URL	and	insert	the	
IP	address
	of	any	given	website	in	the	“
Search
Whois
”	box	found	at	the	top	right	corner	of	the	web	page.	Here	is	a	snapshot	showing	the
results	of	a	sample	query	performed	on	the	Facebook’s	IP	address	
173.252.120.6
.
	
Figure	5.	4
	
Traceroute
Traceroute
	is	a	network	diagnostic	tool	to	identify	the	actual	path	(route)	that	the
information	(packets)	takes	to	travel	from	source	to	destination.	The	source	will	be	your
own	computer	called	
localhost
.	The	destination	can	be	any	host	or	server	on	the	local
network	or	Internet.
The	traceroute	tool	is	available	on	both	Windows	and	Linux.	The	command	syntax	for
Windows	is	as	follows:
tracert	
target-domain-or-IP
	
The	command	syntax	for	Linux	is	as	follows:
traceroute	
target-domain-or-IP
	
Usually,	the	transfer	of	information	from	one	computer	to	another	will	not	happen	in	a
single	jump.	It	involves	a	chain	of	several	computers	and	network	devices	called	
hops
	to
transmit	information	from	source	to	destination.	Traceroute	identifies	each	hop	on	that	list
and	the	amount	of	time	it	takes	to	travel	from	one	hop	to	another.	A	snapshot	of	the
traceroute	performed	on	“google.com”	using	a	Windows	computer	is	shown	below:

Figure	5.	5
	
As	shown	in	the	above	snapshot,	the	traceroute	tool	identifies	all	the	hops	present	in	the
path	traversed	by	packets	from	source		to	destination.	Here	
192.168.0.1
	is	the	private	IP
and	
117.192.208.1
	is	the	public	IP	of	the	source	(my	computer).	
74.125.236.66
	is	the
destination	IP	address	(Google’s	server).	All	the	remaining	IP	addresses	shown	in	between
the	source	and	the	destination	belong	to	computers	that	assist	in	carrying	the	information.
	
Obtaining	Archive	of	the	Target	Website
Getting	access	to	the	archive	of	the	target	website	will	let	you	know	how	the	website	was
during	the	time	of	its	launch	and	how	it	got	advanced	and	changed	over	time.	You	will
also	see	all	the	updates	made	to	the	website,	including	the	nature	of	updates	and	their
dates.	You	can	use	the	
WayBackMachine
	tool	to	access	the	this	information.
WayBackMachine:	
http://archive.org/web/
	
Just	use	the	above	link	to	visit	the	WayBackMachine	website	and	type	in	the	URL	of	the
target	website.	You	should	get	a	list	of	archives	of	the	website	listed	in	a	month	by	month
and	yearly	basis	as	shown	in	the	snapshot	below:
	

Figure	5.	6
	

COUNTERMEASURES
I	hope	you	are	now	aware	of	several	ways	using	which	you	can	successfully	perform
footprinting	to	gather	a	whole	lot	of	information	about	the	target.	Once	you	are	done	with
organizing	the	data	that	you	have	obtained	through	the	footprinting	process,	you	can	sit
back	and	analyze	them	to	find	out	possible	vulnerabilities	in	any	of	the	technologies	used
in	the	website.
Many	network	administrators	often	fail	to	update	vulnerable	software	and	scripts	running
on	their	server	to	the	latest	version.	This	can	open	an	opportunity	for	the	hacker	to	exploit
and	gain	access	to	the	system.	Therefore,	it	is	important	to	identify	and	patch	the	existing
vulnerabilities	on	a	regular	basis	and	also	limit	the	amount	of	sensitive	information	leaked
to	the	Internet.

Chapter	6	-	Scanning
	
After	gathering		a	variety	of	information	about	the	target	through	
footprinting
,	it	is	time	to
move	on	to	the	next	step	called	
scanning
.	Scanning	is	the	second	step	in	the	intelligence
gathering	process	of	a	hacker	where	information	about	specific	IP	addresses,	operating
systems,	their	architecture	and	services	running	on	computers	can	be	obtained.	Unlike
footprinting
	which	gathers	information	passively	from	various	third	party	sources,
scanning
	involves	actively	engaging	with	the	target	to	obtain	information.
	

DETECTING	LIVE	SYSTEMS
The	first	step	in	the	process	of	scanning	is	to	determine	whether	the	target	is	alive	or	not.
This	can	be	done	using	the	
ping	
tool	that	is	readily	available	on	both	Windows	and	Linux
computers.	Just	open	the	command	prompt	if	you	are	on	Windows	or	terminal	window	if
you	are	on	Linux	and	type	ping	followed	by	the	target	IP	address	as	shown	below:
ping	
173.252.120.6
	
If	the	target	is	alive	and	online,	you	should	get	a	reply	from	the	target	or	you	if	the	target	is
not	alive	you	will	get	a	response	saying	“ping	request	cannot	find	the	host”.
	
Angry	IP	Scanner
You	can	even	ping	a	range	of	IP	addresses	all	at	once	using	a	nice	tool	called	“Angry	IP
Scanner”.	It	is	an	open-source	cross-platform	network	scanner	tool	packed	with	several
useful	features.
All	you	need	to	do	is	enter	the	
starting
	and	the	
ending	
IP	of	the	range	that	you	want	to
ping	and	click	on	the	“Start”	button	as	shown	in	the	below	figure.	This	should	tell	you
which	of	those	IPs	are	available	and	which	are	not.
Figure	6.	1
	
Angry	IP	Scanner	is	available	for	both	Windows	and	Linux	operating	systems	and	can	be
downloaded	from	the	link	below:
Angry	IP	Scanner:	
http://angryip.org/download/
	
Online	Ping	Tool
If	you	would	like	to	ping	the	target	using	a	third	party	computer	instead	of	yours,	you	can
do	so	using	online	tools	like	
Just-Ping
	which	pings	the	target	from	90	different	geo
locations	worldwide.	You	can	access	Just-Ping	tool	from	the	link	below:
Just-Ping:	
http://cloudmonitor.ca.com/en/ping.php
	
The	following	figure	6.2	on	the	next	page	shows	a	sample	ping	test	conducted	using	the

Just-Ping
	tool:
	
Figure	6.	2
	

TYPES	OF	SCANNING
Now,	let	us	discuss	one	by	one	some	of	the	different	types	of	scanning	that	are	in	place.
	
Port	Scanning
Port	scanning
	involves	sending	a	series	of	messages	to	the	target	computer	to	discover
the	types	of	network	services	running	on	it.	Since	each	service	is	associated	with	a	“well
known”	port	number,	performing	a	port	scan	on	the	target	will	reveal	the	ports	that	are
open.	So,	when	a	port	is	said	to	be	open	the	service	associated	with	it	is	said	to	be	active
and	running,	thereby	opening	up	the	opportunity	for	the	attacker	to	break	into	it.
For	example,	if	a	port	scan	on	the	target	shows	that	port	80	and	port	25	are	open,	that
means	the	target	computer	has	a	HTTP	service	(web	server)	and	an	SMTP	service	(email
service)	running	on	it	respectively.
	
Network	Scanning
Network	scanning	
is	a	procedure	for	identifying	active	hosts	on	the	target	network	either
for	the	purpose	of	attacking	them	or	for	security	assessment.	In	this	way	it	would	be
possible	for	the	hacker	to	make	a	list	of	vulnerable	hosts	for	direct	attack	or	to	use	them
indirectly	to	attack	other	hosts.
	
Vulnerability	Scanning
Vulnerability	scanning
	involves	the	use	of	automated	tools	known	as	
vulnerability
scanners
	to	proactively	identify	security	vulnerabilities	of	computer	systems	in	a	network.
These	tools	will	scan	the	target	to	find	out	the	presence	of	known	flaws	that	are
susceptible	to	exploits.
	

TOOLS	FOR	SCANNING
The	following	are	some	of	the	popular	tools	available	for	scanning:
	
Nmap
Nmap
	is	a	popular	open-source	tool	for	network	discovery	and	security	auditing	that
works	on	different	platforms	like	Linux,	Windows	and	Mac.	It	basically	comes	in	the	form
of	a	command	line	interface;	however,	to	facilitate	the	ease	of	use	it	is	also	available	in	a
GUI	format	called	
Zenmap
.	For	Windows	machines,	you	can	install	the	“self-installer”
version	of	
Nmap
	that	comes	in	the	“.exe”	format.	The	download	link	for	the	same	in
available	below:
Nmap	Download:	
http://nmap.org/download.html
	
After	installing	the	tool,	run	the	desktop	shortcut	to	open	the	
Zenmap
	window	which
typically	looks	as	shown	below:
	
Figure	6.	3
	
The	“Target”	box	needs	to	be	filled	with	the	target	
IP	address
	or	
domain	name
	on	which
you	want	to	perform	the	scan.	It	also	comes	pre	loaded	with	10	different	
scan	profiles
	that
you	can	select	from.
	
Intense	Scan
This	scan	type	should	be	reasonably	quick	as	it	only	scans	TCP	ports.	Additionally,	it
makes	an	attempt	to	detect	the	OS	type,	various	services	and	their	version	numbers	that
are	running	on	the	target	machine.
	
Intense	Scan	Plus	UDP
It	is	the	same	
Intense	scan
	as	described	above	but	also	includes	scanning	of	UDP	ports.
	

Intense	Scan,	all	TCP	Ports
Unlike	the	normal	
Intense	scan
	which	only	scans	a	list	of	1000	most	common	ports,	the
“
Intense	scan,	all	TCP	ports
”	scans	all	available	65535	ports.
	
Intense	Scan,	No	Ping
This	option	will	exclude	pinging	the	target	from	the	
Intense	scan
.	You	may	use	this	option
when	you	already	know	that	the	target	is	up	or	is	blocking	ping	requests.
	
Ping	Scan
This	option	will	only	ping	the	target	but	does	not	perform	port	scanning	of	any	type.
	
Quick	Scan
Scans	faster	than	the	
Intense	scan
	by	limiting	the	number	of	TCP	ports	scanned	to	only	the
top	100	most	common	TCP	ports.
	
Quick	Scan	Plus
Quick	scan	plus
	adds	OS	detection	and	a	bit	of	version	detection	features	to	
Quick	scan
.
	
Quick	Traceroute
This	option	will	show	you	the	route	that	the	packets	take	to	reach	the	target	starting	with
the	localhost	(source	or	your	own	computer).
	
Regular	Scan
This	will	perform	the	ping	and	TCP	port	scan	of	1000	default	ports	on	the	target.
	
Slow	Comprehensive	Scan
This	scan	will	try	all	possible	options	to	uncover	as	much	information	as	it	can	about	the
target.	It	uses	three	different	protocols:	TCP,	UDP	and	SCTP	in	order	to	detect	hosts.
Out	of	all	the	10	scanning	options,	I	reckon	
Intense	Scan
	to	be	appropriate	under	most
conditions.	Just	fill	the	“Target”	box,	select	the	“Intense	scan”	profile	and	hit	the	“Scan”
button.	Let	us	now	analyze	the	Nmap	result	output	by	running	it	on	a	sample	target.
After	the	scan	is	completed	the	“Nmap	Output”	tab	displays	the	raw	output	of	all	the	scan
operations	such	as	the	
date	and	time
	it	was	performed,	the	results	from	
ping	scan
,
discovered	
open	ports
,	
target	OS
	and	
traceroute	results
	as	shown	below:
	

Figure	6.	4
	
The	other	tabs	split	the	same	results	into	an	organized	manner	so	as	to	display	them	in	a
more	user	friendly	manner	using	GUI	interface.	The	“Ports/Hosts”	tab	will	display	a	list	of
discovered	ports,	their	status	as	to	whether	they	are	closed	or	open,	the	protocol	associated
and	the	services	running	on	them.	A	snapshot	of	the	sample	output	is	shown	below:
	
Figure	6.	5
	
The	“Topology”	tab	displays	the	result	of	
traceroute
	command	in	a	graphical	manner
showing	each	
hop
	involved	in	the	path.
	

Figure	6.	6
	
The	“Host	Details”	tab	shows	the	status	of	the	host,	its	name,	number	of	ports	scanned,
uptime,	last	boot	time,	type	of	operating	system	running	including	its	version	number	and
many	other	details	as	shown	in	the	below	figure:
	
Figure	6.	7
	
NetScanTools	Pro
NetScanTools	Pro
	is	another	wonderful	program	for	Windows	that	has	a	powerful	set	of
over	50	network	tools	including	both	automated	and	manual	ways	to	retrieve	information
from	the	target.
	

Figure	6.	8
	
You	can	use	the	“Automated	Tools”	to	quickly	perform	port	scan	and	grab	vital
information	about	the	target	such	as	DNS	records,	Whois	data,	Traceroute	details	all	from
a	single	place.	On	the	other	hand	the	“Manual	Tools”	section	contains	individual	tools
specially	crafted	to	give	more	control	in	the	scanning	process	for	advanced	users.
	
Online	Tools
You	can	also	make	use	of	online	tools	to	perform	port	scan	and	discover	important
information	about	the	target.	The	following	are	some	of	the	links	useful	online	network
tools	that	are	worth	considering:
	
PenTest-Tools
	
YouGetSignal
	
Other	Popular	Tools
Here	is	a	list	of	some	of	the	other	popular	tools	that	you	may	want	to	explore:
	
SuperScan
	
ipEye
	

OS	FINGERPRINTING
OS	fingerprinting
	is	the	process	of	detecting	the	operating	system	of	the	target	host	or	a
network.	The	following	are	some	of	the	commonly	used	OS	fingerprinting	methods.
	
Active	Fingerprinting
Active	fingerprinting
	is	the	method	in	which	specially	crafted	packets	are	sent	to	the
target	system	and	the	response	is	noted.	Since	different	operating	systems	respond	to
source	packets	in	different	ways,	this	response	can	be	analyzed	to	determine	the	target	OS.
One	of	the	simple	example	is	the	use	of	
Nmap	tool
	as	discussed	in	the	previous	section
which	employs	
active	fingerprinting
	method	to	determine	the	target	OS.
	
Banner	Grabbing
Another	commonly	used	method	of	active	fingerprinting	is	called	
banner	grabbing
.	This
can	be	done	using	a	simple	tool	called	
telnet
.	Telnet	is	readily	available	on	Windows	XP
and	previous	versions.	For	Windows	Vista,	7	and	8	machines	you	need	to	activate	the	in-
built	telnet	tool	before	you	can	use	it.	Just	search	for	“how	to	enable	telnet	on	windows”
on	Google	to	find	detailed	instructions	for	enabling	telnet	client	on	your	computer.
Once	you	have	enabled	the	telnet	client	on	your	computer,	banner	grabbing	is	pretty
simple.	Just	type	the	following	command	in	the	command	prompt	to	detect	the	operating
system	running	on	the	target:
telnet	
target-domain-or-IP	80
	
This	will	open	the	connection	with	the	target.	Next	type	the	text	exactly	as	follows	
HEAD
/	HTTP/1.1
	and	hit	the	
Enter
	key	twice.	This	should	fetch	results	where	there	is	a
possibility	of	the	target	OS	being	mentioned	as	shown	in	the	below	figure.
	
Figure	6.	9
	
Passive	Fingerprinting
Passive	fingerprinting
	is	a	technique	that	uses	indirect	methods	to	determine	the	target
operating	system.	Unlike	active	fingerprinting	which	sends	packets	to	the	target,	passive
fingerprinting	on	the	other	hand	uses	sniffing	technique	to	analyze	the	target	network
traffic	and	determine	the	operating	system.	It	is	less	accurate	than	active	fingerprinting.
You	can	use	online	tools	like	
Netcraft
	to	perform	passive	fingerprinting.
Netcraft	Tool:	
http://toolbar.netcraft.com/site_report
	
Just	visit	the	above	link	to	access	the	Netcraft	tool	and	enter	the	target	domain	or	IP

address	to	know	the	target	operating	system,	possible	vulnerabilities,	its	risk	rating	and
other	useful	information.
	

CONCEALING	YOUR	IDENTITY
Concealing	you	true	identity	during	the	processes	like	footprinting	and	scanning	is	very
much	necessary	as	there	is	a	real	chance	of	the	target	tracing	back	to	you.	Some	of	the
methods	that	you	can	employ	to	conceal	your	identity	are	discussed	below.
	
Using	a	Proxy
A	proxy	server	can	be	used	to	conceal	your	real	IP	address	while	performing	scanning	and
hack	attempts	on	the	target.	Since	the	IP	address	tells	everything	about	you,	concealing	it
using	a	proxy	can	be	highly	effective	in	hiding	your	origin.
Even	though	there	are	different	types	of	proxies	available,	I	recommend	using	a	VPN
proxy	service	to	hide	your	IP	address.	VPN	services	are	fast	and	provide	reliable	ways	not
only	to	hide	your	IP	address	but	also	to	protect	your	data	and	identity	over	the	Internet.
Here	are	a	few	popular	VPN	services	that	you	can	try:
	
HideMyAss	Proxy
	
VyprVPN	Proxy
	
Alternatively	you	can	also	use	a	chain	of	public	proxies	to	further	enhance	your	stealth
operation	using	free	tools	like	
Proxifier
	and	
SocksChain
.	Please	note	that	using	public
proxies	can	slow	down	your	speed	and	hence	VPN	proxies	are	more	recommended	as	they
best	serve	the	purpose.
The	other	way	to	hide	your	identity	is	by	using	online	tools	for	pinging	and	scanning	the
target.	During	the	use	of	online	tools,	the	IP	address	of	the	server	hosting	the	tools	is
exposed	to	the	target	and	not	the	one	that	belongs	to	the	actual	attacker.
Once	you	have	gathered	a	long	list	of	information	about	the	target	through	
footprinting
and	
scanning
,	it	is	time	to	analyze	them	for	possible	vulnerabilities	in	the	operating
system,	technologies	or	services	running	on	the	target.	You	can	make	use	of	the	following
websites	to	find	information	about	latest	vulnerabilities	and	exploits:
	
1
.	
http://www.securiteam.com
	
2
.	
http://www.zone-h.org
	
3
.	
http://www.securityfocus.com
	
4
.	
http://www.packetstormsecurity.com
	

5
.	
http://www.cybercrime.gov
	

COUNTERMEASURES
So	far,	you	have	learnt	different	scanning	techniques	to	discover	information	about	the
target.	Now	let	us	look	into	some	of	the	countermeasures	that	one	can	take	to	prevent	vital
information	from	leaking	into	the	hands	of	an	attacker.
	
Configure	web	servers	to	prevent	information	leakage.
	
Disable	unwanted/unused	services	and	protocols.
	
Use	an	Intrusion	Detection	System	(IDS)	to	detect	and	log	port	scans.

Chapter	7	-	Hacking	Passwords
	
Password	hacking	is	one	of	the	hottest	and	most	widely	discussed	topics	in	the	field	of
computer	hacking.	In	today’s	world,	passwords	alone	play	a	key	role	in	deciding	the
security	of	a	web	server	or	any	other	computer	system.	As	a	result,	hacking	the	password
is	one	of	the	easiest	and	sometimes	the	only	way	to	gain	access	to	the	system.	In	this
chapter,	you	will	be	introduced	to	various	password	hacking	techniques	that	are	frequently
used	in	the	hacking	industry.
To	begin	with,	I	will	let	you	know	some	of	the	obvious,	simple	yet	effective	techniques	to
hack	passwords:
	
1
.	
Social	Engineering:	
This	type	of	technique	involves	psychological	manipulation	of
people	into	performing	actions	that	lead	to	the	disclosure	of	their	confidential
information.	In	other	words,	social	engineering	is	just	a	trick	played	by	the	hacker	to
gain	the	trust	of	people	so	that	they	reveal	the	password	by	themselves.	
	
Scenario-1:
	The	hacker	may	call	the	target	person	by	pretending	himself	as	a	bank
official	and	ask	him	to	confirm	his	password	stating	that	this	has	to	be	done	as	a	part
of	an	ongoing	verification	program.	In	most	cases,	the	target	person	on	the	other	end
believes	this	and	reveals	his	password	to	the	hacker.
	
Scenario-2:
	In	order	to	avoid	suspicion,	instead	of	directly	asking	the	victim	to
reveal	the	password,	the	hacker	may	obtain	other	vital	information	such	as	the	“Date
of	Birth”,	“Place	of	Birth”,	“High	School	Details”	etc.	from	the	target	person.	Using
these	details,	the	hacker	can	easily	reset	the	password	and	gain	unauthorized	access.	
	
Even	though	social	engineering	seems	simple,	it	is	proven	that	most	people
would	easily	fall	victim	to	this	attack.	Lack	of	awareness	among	people	is	the
prime	reason	for	the	success	behind	this	trick.
	
2
.	
Guessing:	
As	most	people	are	known	to	use	easy	to	remember	words	such	as	their
“pet’s	name”,	“phone	number”,	“child’s	name”	etc.	as	their	passwords,	it	is	often
possible	for	the	hacker	to	easily	guess	the	password.
	
3
.	
Shoulder	surfing:	
It	is	the	act	of	spying	on	one’s	keyboard	from	behind	the
shoulders	as	a	person	types	his/her	password.	This	technique	works	well	particularly
in	crowded	areas	such	as	cyber	cafes	and	ATMs	where	people	are	usually	unaware	of
what	is	happening	behind	their	shoulders.
After	understanding	some	of	the	simple	password	hacking	techniques,	it	is	time	to	move
on	to	the	next	level.		Now,	let	us	jump	into	some	of	the	serious	methods	that	hackers	use	to
crack	passwords:
	

DICTIONARY	ATTACK
A	
dictionary	attack
	is	a	type	of	password	cracking	technique	where	a	long	list	of	words
from	the	dictionary	is	repeatedly	tried	against	the	target	until	the	right	match	is	found.	This
technique	can	be	used	to	crack	passwords	that	contain	words	found	in	the	dictionary.
Generally,	the	success	of	a	dictionary	attack	is	based	on	the	fact	that	most	people	have	a
tendency	to	use	easy	to	remember	passwords	that	are	found	in	the	dictionary.	However,	if
one	uses	a	strong	password	with	a	combination	of	alphabets	and	numbers	or	introducing	a
slight	variation	to	the	actual	spelling	would	make	it	impossible	for	the	dictionary	attack	to
crack	such	passwords.	
One	of	my	favourite	tool	to	carry	out	the	dictionary	attack	is	
Brutus
.	It	is	a	remote	online
password	cracker	that	works	on	Windows	platform	and	can	be	downloaded	from	the
following	link:
Brutus	Download:
	
http://www.hoobie.net/brutus/
	
NOTE:
	Some	antivirus	programs	are	known	to	have	conflict	with	the	
Brutus
	application.
So,	it	is	recommend	that	you	temporarily	disable	your	antivirus	before	running	the	
Brutus
application.
	
Now,	let	me	give	you	a	small	demo	on	how	to	use	
Brutus
.	Here	is	a	step-by-step
procedure:
	
1
.	
After	downloading	the	tool	from	the	above	link,	unzip	the	package	into	a	new	empty
folder.
	
2
.	
Run	the	“BrutusA2.exe”	file	to	open	the	application	as	shown	in	the	figure	below:
	
Figure	7.	1
	
3
.	
Enter	the	
IP	address
	(or	
domain	name
)	of	the	target	server	in	the	“Target”	field.

Select	the	type	of	password	that	you	want	to	crack	from	the	“Type”	field	or	enter
your	own	custom	port	number	in	the	“Port”	field”.
	
4
.	
If	you	know	the	
username
	for	which	you	want	hack	the	password	for,	then	check	the
“Single	User”	option	and	enter	the	
username
	in	the	“UserID”	field.	Otherwise	leave
the	default	settings	to	work	as	it	is	so	that	the	
username	list
	is	loaded	from	the
“users.txt”	file.
	
5
.	
In	the	“Pass	Mode”	field	select	the	option	“Word	List”.	The	
list	of	words
	will	be
loaded	from	the	“words.txt”	file	by	default	which	contains	around	800+	words.	If
you’ve	a	
.TXT
	file	that	contains	more	words,	then	you	can	use	that	by	selecting	the
“Browse”	option.	The	more	bigger	the	list	is,	better	the	chances	of	cracking	the
password.	Below	is	an	example	of	how	a	
username
	and	
password
	list	might	look
like:
	
Figure	7.	2
	
6
.	
Now,	hit	the	“Start”	button	to	begin	the	cracking	process.	Brutus	will	try	every	word
in	the	
password	list
	for	each	of	the	
usernames
	present	in	the	
username	list
.	It	will
take	a	while	for	the	process	to	complete	and	if	you’re	lucky,	you	should	get	a	
positive
authentication
	response	and	the	cracked	password	as	shown	in	the	below	figure:
	


Figure	7.	3
	
NOTE:
	It	is	always	a	smart	idea	to	
use	a	proxy
	before	attempting	this	hacking	process.
This	will	prevent	your	real	IP	address	from	being	stored	in	the	logs	of	remote	server	and
thus	reduces	the	chances	of	being	traced	back.
	

BRUTE-FORCE	ATTACK
Unlike	the	dictionary	attack	which	tries	only	those	words	present	in	the	list,	the	
brute
force	attack
	on	the	other	hand	tries	every	possible	permutation	of	alphabets,	numbers	and
even	special	characters	until	the	right	password	if	found.
In	theory,	it	is	possible	to	crack	any	password	using	this	approach,	but	here’s	the	catch!
Brute	force	attack
	takes	a	long	time	to	crack	passwords.	The	time	actually	depends	on	the
speed	of	the	computer	and	the	complexity	of	the	password.
For	example,	if	the	target	password	is	small	and	doesn’t	contain	any	numbers	or	special
characters,	it	is	fairly	easy	to	crack	such	passwords	using	this	approach.	However,	if	the
password	is	lengthy,	contains	numbers	or	even	special	characters,	this	approach	may	take
a	long	time	to	complete.	For	some	complex	passwords,	brute	force	approach	may	take	up
even	years	to	finish	the	cracking	process	as	there	are	billions	of	permutations	to	try.
Here	is	how	you	can	configure	the	
Brutus
	program	to	try	the	brute	force	approach:
	
1
.	
Configure	the	“Target”,	“Type”	and	“Port”	in	the	same	way	as	in	case	of	the
dictionary	attack
.	Under	the	“Authentication	Options”,	select	the	“Pass	Mode”	as
Brute	Force
	and	click	on	the	“Range”	button	as	shown	in	the	Figure	7.4	below:
	
	
2
.	
Once	you	click	on	“Range”	you	will	see	a	number	of	options	to	select	with	such	as
“Digits	only”,	“Lowercase	Alpha”,	“Uppercase	Alpha”	and	so	on.	You	can	also	set
the	
Min	Length
	and	
Max	Length
	to	narrow	your	brute	force	attack	options	(Figure
7.5).
	
Figure	7.	4
	

Figure	7.	5
	
In	the	above	example,	Brutus	will	try	all	permutations	of	lower	alphabets
ranging	from	0	to	6	characters	in	length.	Going	for	options	like	“Mixed	Alpha”
or	“Alphanumeric”	and	increasing	the	
Max	Length
	would	increase	the	success
rate	of	cracking	the	password	but	consequently	takes	more		time	to	complete.
	
3
.	
Once	your	range	selection	is	over,	click	“OK”	and	hit	the	“Start”	button.	The	brute
force	cracking	attempt	will	begin	and	will	take	anywhere	from	a	few	minutes	to	a
couple	of	hours	to	complete.	If	the	crack	attempt	is	successful,	you	should	see	the
username
	and	its	corresponding	
password
	displayed	on	the	Brutus	window!
	

RAINBOW	TABLE
A	
rainbow	table
	is	a	pre-computed	table	that	contains	a	long	list	of	password	hashes	for
dictionary	words	as	well	as	alphanumeric	permutation	of	words.	The	hacker	initially
generates	a	long	list	of	password	hashes	and	stores	them	in	a	rainbow	table	for	later	use.
Although	generating	a	rainbow	table	initially	takes	a	long	time	and	utilizes	more	storage
space,	once	computed	it	can	greatly	reduce	the	time	taken	for	the	password	cracking
process.
Any	computer	system	that	requires	password	authentication	will	maintain	a	table	of
usernames	and	passwords	in	its	database.	In	case	if	the	hacker	manages	to	steal	this	table
from	the	database,	he	would	easily	be	in	a	position	to	gain	access	to	a	large	number	of
accounts	on	the	target	system.	In	order	to	prevent	this	from	happening,	most	systems	store
the	passwords	in	a	cryptographic	hash	format	as	opposed	to	plain	text.
For	example,	when	a	user	completes	the	sign-up	process	on	an	online	portal,	the	system
may	convert	his	password	to	MD5	hash	format	and	store	it	in	its	database	table.	Suppose	if
the	user	has	his	password	as	
goldfish
,	its	MD5	hash	would	be	as	follows:
MD5	Hash:
	861836f13e3d627dfa375bdb8389214e
	
Thereafter	whenever	the	user	tries	to	log	into	the	portal,	his	password	gets	converted	to	the
MD5	hash	format	on	the	fly	and	is	compared	against	the	existing	hash	in	the	database
table.	If	both	the	hashes	match,	access	is	granted	to	the	user.
Now,	even	if	the	hacker	manages	to	gain	access	to	the	database	and	steal	the	password
table,	he	would	only	see	a	long	list	of	cryptographic	hashes	and	not	the	actual	password.
This	is	where	
rainbow	tables
	come	in	handy.	The	hacker	can	use	the	
rainbow	tables
	to
compare	the	long	list	of	pre-computed	hashes	against	the	stolen	list	of	password	hashes.	If
the	hashes	match,	the	password	would	be	the	one	that	was	initially	used	to	generate	the
hash.
Unlike	a	
brute	force
	approach	where	the	hash	is	computed	on	every	attempt,	the	
rainbow
table
	approach	on	the	other	hand	utilizes	a	pre-computed	list	of	hashes	to	directly	compare
them	against	an	existing	password	hash.	As	the	time	required	to	compute	the	hash	on
every	attempt	is	cut	down,	the	
rainbow	table
	approach	takes	significantly	less	time	to
complete	the	cracking	process.
A	practical	example	of	
rainbow	table
	approach	will	be	discussed	in	the	next	chapter	where
we	take	up	the	topic	of	cracking	Windows	passwords.
	

PHISHING	ATTACK
Phishing	is	a	form	of	social	engineering	technique	used	by	hackers	to	gather	sensitive
information	such	as	usernames,	passwords	and	credit	card	details	by	posing	as
a	trustworthy	person	or	organization.
Phishing	scams	usually	sends	an	email	message	to	users	requesting	for	their	personal
information,	or	redirects	them	to	a	website	where	they	are	required	to	enter	their	personal
information.
In	most	cases,	a	phishing	email	directs	the	victims	to	follow	a	link	leading	to	a	website
where	they	will	have	to	enter	their	login	details	or	other	confidential	information.	In
reality	this	website	is	a	fake	one	created	by	the	hacker	(often	referred	to	as	spoofed
website)	which	is	an	exact	replica	of	the	original	or	appears	similar.	When	the	victim
enters	his/her	login	details	on	a	spoofed	page	they	are	actually	stolen	away	by	the	hacker.
For	example,	the	hacker	may	send	an	email	that	pretends	to	have	been	appearing	from	the
bank	where	the	victim	maintains	an	account	and	ask	him/her	to	update	the	login	details	by
following	the	link	present	in	the	email.	The	email	further	mentions	that	this	update	process
is	mandatory	and	failing	to	do	so	will	result	in	the	bank	account	being	locked.	As	a
response,	the	victim	clicks	on	the	link	where	he/she	will	be	taken	to	the	fake	login	page
that	looks	similar	to	the	original	one.	However,	when	the	login	details	are	entered,	they	are
recorded	and	stored	on	the	website	for	later	access	by	the	hacker.	The	victim	remains
unaware	of	the	entire	process	but	the	hacker	skilfully	manages	to	hack	the	password.
	

COUNTERMEASURES
After	addressing	some	of	the	popular	password	cracking	techniques,	let	us	now	look	at
some	of	the	countermeasures	that	can	be	taken	to	protect	ourselves	from	the	above
mentioned	attacks.
	
Social	Engineering
The	measures	needed	to	protect	yourself	from	
social	engineering
	attacks	are	pretty	simple
and	straight	forward.	Never	disclose	your	password	or	any	other	personal	information	to
anyone	via	phone	or	email.	Attackers	may	even	try	to	convince	you	by	pretending	to	be	an
authorized	person	with	whom	you	can	share	the	personal	details	with.	But	remember	that
passwords	are	meant	only	to	be	entered	on	login	pages	and	not	to	be	shared	with	any
person	at	all.
	
Guessing	and	Shoulder	Surfing
Always	make	sure	that	your	password	does	not	contain	your	pet	names,	birth	date,	family
member	names	or	anything	as	such	that	are	easy	to	be	guessed.	It	is	recommended	that
your	password	contains	a	combination	of	hard	to	guess	words,	numbers	and	special
characters.
As	far	as	the	
shoulder	surfing
	is	concerned,	you	can	avoid	the	same	by	making	sure	that
no	one	else	behind	you	is	watching	the	movement	of	your	fingers	over	the	keyboard	when
your	are	typing	the	password.
	
Dictionary	Attack
To	protect	yourself	from	a	
dictionary	attack
,	all	you	need	to	do	is	make	sure	that	your
password	does	not	contain	words	from	dictionary.	That	means,	your	password	is	not
something	like	“apple”,	“lotus”	or	“mango”.	Instead	use	words	that	are	not	in	the
dictionary.	You	can	also	use	a	phrase	like	
str0ngpAss??
	as	your	password	so	that	it	cannot
be	cracked	using	the	dictionary	attack	approach.
	
Brute-Force	Attack	and	Rainbow	Table
Brute-Force
	attacks	often	become	successful	when	the	passwords	are	short.	That	means,
by	keeping	the	password	long	enough	you	can	make	it	hard	for	the	attacker	to	crack	it.
Usually	a	password	whose	length	is	of	8	characters	was	considered	long	enough	and	safe
in	the	past.	However,	this	is	not	the	case	in	the	present	day	scenario	as	the	modern
computers	have	high	speed	processing	capabilities	to	try	thousands	of		guesses	per	second.
So,	in	order	to	make	your	password	immune	to	brute-force	attack	make	sure	it	is	larger
than	8	characters	and	is	a	combinations	of	alphabets,	numbers	and	special	characters.
You	can	avoid	rainbow	table	attack	on	your	passwords	by	making	it	too	long.	If	your
password	is	more	than	12	or	14	characters,	it	would	be	extremely	time	consuming	to
create	tables	for	them.	This	should	keep	you	protected	from	such	attacks.
	

Phishing	Attack
You	can	avoid	phishing	attack	by	following	the	below	mentioned	guidelines:
	
Do	not	respond	to	suspicious	emails	that	ask	you	to	give	your	personal	information.
If	you	are	unsure	whether	an	email	request	is	legitimate,	verify	the	same	by	calling
the	respective	bank/company.	Always	use	the	telephone	numbers	printed	on	your
bank	records	or	statements	and	not	those	mentioned	in	the	suspicious	email.
	
Do	not	use	the	links	in	an	email,	instant	messenger	or	chat	conversation	to	enter	a
website.	Instead,	always	type	the	URL	of	the	website	on	your	browser’s	address	bar
to	get	into	a	website.
	
Legitimate	websites	always	use	a	secure	connection	(
https://
)	on	those	pages	which
are	intended	to	gather	sensitive	information	such	as	passwords,	account	numbers	or
credit	card	details.	You	will	see	a	lock	icon	
	in	your	browser’s	address	bar	which
indicates	a	secure	connection.	On	some	websites	like	“PayPal”	which	uses	an
extended	validation	certificate,	the	address	bar	turns	
GREEN
	as	shown	below:
Figure	7.	6
	
Even	if	the	login	page	is	not	secure	(https://)	the	target	website	may	still	be
legitimate.	However,	look	for	misspellings	like	
www.papyal.com
,	
www.payapl.com
or	
paypal.somethingelse.com
	instead	of	the	legitimate	site	
www.paypal.com
	and
make	sure	that	the	login	details	are	only	entered	on	the	legitimate	web	page.

Chapter	8	-	Hacking	Windows
	
Being	one	of	the	most	popular	operating	systems	in	the	world,	Windows	has	its	presence
on	almost	every	computer	system	today.	So,	in	the	field	of	ethical	hacking	understanding
the	techniques	to	hack	into	Windows	systems	becomes	highly	significant.	Let	us	now	look
into	some	of	these	techniques	using	which	you	can	successfully	manage	to	hack	any
Windows	computer.
	

GAINING	ACCESS	TO	THE	SYSTEM
Gaining	access	to	a	password	protected	user	account	especially	the	one	with
“administrator	privileges”	forms	the	key	element	in	hacking	Windows.	The	following	are
the	two	important	techniques	using	which	you	can	gain	access	to	any	protected	account	on
Windows	without	actually	knowing	the	password.
	
Resetting	the	Windows	Password
If	you	wish	to	gain	access	to	a	Windows	computer	whose	account	is	password	protected,
resetting	the	password	is	an	easy	option.	Windows	stores	all	its	account	information	and
encrypted	passwords	in	a	file	called	“SAM”.	By	modifying	the	“SAM”	file	it	is	possible	to
reset	the	password	of	any	user	account	including	that	of	the	“administrator”.	You	can
accomplish	this	task	using	a	small	open-source	tool	known	as	
Offline	NT	Password	&
Registry	Editor
.	This	utility	works	offline,	that	means	you	need	to	shut	down	and	boot	up
the	target	computer	using	a	CD	or	USB	device	such	as	thumb	drive.	The	tool	has	the
following	features:
	
										
You	
do	not
	need	to	know	the	old	password	to	set	a	new	one.
	
										
This	tool	will	allow	you	to	
reset
	the	password	of	any	user	account.
	
										
This	tool	can	also	detect	and
	unlock
	
locked
	or
	disabled
	out	user	accounts.
	
You	can	download	the	tool	from	the	link	below:
Download:
	
http://pogostick.net/~pnh/ntpasswd/
	
Resources	to	create	a	bootable	CD	and	bootable	USB	device	are	available	for	download
separately.	Both	works	similarly	and	is	a	matter	of	your	convenience.	However,	in	this
book	I	will	give	a	demonstration	of	the	USB	version	to	reset	the	existing	password.	To
create	a	bootable	USB	drive,	download	and	unzip	the	USB	version	of	the	tool	from	the
above	link	by	following	the	simple	instructions	given	in	the	
readme.txt
	file.
Once	you	have	the	bootable	USB	device	in	your	hand,	plug-in	the	device	and	boot	from	it.
Make	sure	that	you	have	enabled	the	USB	boot	option	and	set	the	top	boot	priority	for
your	USB	device	in	BIOS.	Step-by-step	instructions	to	complete	the	password	reset
process	is	given	below:
	

Figure	8.	1
	
Once	the	tool	is	running	from	your	USB	device,	you	should	see	the	screen	similar	to	the
one	shown	above.	Just	follow	the	screen	instructions	and	the	tool	will	automatically	detect
the	partition	on	which	the	Windows	is	installed.	Usually	the	right	options	are	preloaded	in
the	square	bracket	as	shown	in	the	below	snapshot.	So,	just	pressing	
Enter
	key	should
work.
	
Figure	8.	2
	
In		the	next	step,	you	will	be	asked	to	“select	which	part	of	the	registry	to	load”.	You	need
to	select	the	option-
1	
that	is	“Password	rest	[sam]”	which	is	preloaded	by	default	as	shown
below.	So	just	press	
Enter	
to	proceed.
	
Figure	8.	3
	
In	the	next	step,	select	the	option-
1
	which	is	“Edit	user	data	and	passwords”	as	shown
below	and	hit	
Enter
.
	
Figure	8.	4
	
Now,	you	should	see	a	list	of	“Usernames”	and	their	“Admin”	status	being	displayed.

Select	the	user	who	has	administrator	privilege	and	hit	
Enter
.
	
Figure	8.	5
	
In	the	next	screen	you	will	be	asked	to	select	from	a	list	of	options	that	you	may	want	to
perform	on	the	selected	user.	Here,	just	select	the	option-
1
	which	is	“Clear	(blank)	user
password”	and	hit	
Enter
.
	
Figure	8.	6
	
This	should	reset	the	password	for	the	user	account	to	make	it	go	blank,	so	that	the	next
time	you	reboot	your	Windows	you	should	be	able	to	login	automatically	as	if	there	was
no	password	set	for	that	user	account.
Now	quit	editing	user	by	pressing	
q
	and	hit	
Enter
	until	you	proceed	to	the	screen	where
you	will	be	asked	to	confirm	“writing	back	changes”	to	the	SAM	file.	This	step	is	very
important	where	you	need	to	press	
y
	and	hit	
Enter
	as	shown	in	the	snapshot	below.	If	you
accidentally	press	
Enter
	keeping	the	default	option	which	is	
n
,	the	reset	process	will	fail
and	the	whole	procedure	will	have	to	be	repeated	again	from	the	beginning.	So,	changing
the	default	option	from	
n
	to	
y
	before	pressing	
Enter	
is	very	important.
	
Figure	8.	7
	
This	will	complete	the	reset	process	where	the	existing	password	will	be	removed	and	set
to	blank.	Disconnect		the	USB	device	and	press	
CTRL+ALT+DEL
	to	reboot	the
computer.	Now,	the	Windows	should	let	you	login	to	the	system	without	insisting	to	enter
the	password.
	
Restoring	the	Password	After	Breach
Resetting	the	password	is	a	wonderful	option	to	easily	gain	access	to	the	password
protected	accounts.	However,	this	method	has	a	clear	drawback	as	the	password	reset
process	is	permanent.	The	administrator	of	the	target	machine	will	easily	come	to	know
about	the	security	breach	as	thereafter	no	password	will	be	asked	during	the	login	process.

To	overcome	this	drawback,	we	will	have	to	device	a	means	to	restore	everything	back	to
normal	once	the	purpose	of	breach	is	completed.	For	this	we	will	have	to	take	a	backup	of
the	original	
SAM
	file	before	modifying	it	in	the	password	reset	process	and	safely	restore
it	back	to	make	everything	look	normal.
The	
SAM
	file	is	located	in	the	drive	where	the	Windows	is	installed	(usually	
C:
)	under	the
following	path:	
\windows\system32\config
.	You	can	easily	access	this	location	by	booting
up	the	computer	from	your	live	
Kali	Linux
	DVD.	Once	the	
Kali
	DVD	is	loaded,	double-
click	the	“Computer	Icon”	present	on	the	desktop	to	open	up	the	explorer	window.	Now,
navigate	to	the	above	location	to	find	the	
SAM
	file	and	back	it	up	to	a	different	location
such	as	a	different	drive	or	to	your	own	USB	device.
	
Figure	8.	8
Now	reboot	the	system	and	perform	the	password	reset	process	as	discussed	earlier.	Once
you	are	done	with	your	work,	reboot	the	system	again	with	
Kali
	DVD	and	navigate	to	the
location	of	
SAM
	file.	Rename	the	existing	file	to	
SAM.OLD
	and	restore	the	original
SAM
	file	from	the	backup	location.	This	should	bring	everything	back	to	normal	and
avoid	suspicion.
	
Bypassing	the	Windows	Authentication	Process
In	the	previous	section	we	had	discussed	on	how	to	reset	the	password	to	gain	access	to
the	system.	But	there	is	another	smart	way	to	gain	access	to	the	Windows	system	by
silently	bypassing	the	authentication	process	itself.	This	is	done	by	applying	temporary
changes	to	the	Windows	kernel	on	the	fly	(while	booting)	to	disable	the	authentication
process.	A	tool	called	
Kon-Boot
	allows	you	to	accomplish	this	task.	You	can	download	it
from	the	link	below:
Kon-Boot:	
http://www.piotrbania.com/all/kon-boot/
	
Kon-Boot
	is	a	handy	tool	that	allows	you	to	enter	any	password	protected	Windows	user
account	without	having	to	enter	the	password	during	the	log-in	process.	The	tool	allows
you	to	create	a	bootable	CD	or	a	USB	drive.	Once	you	boot	the	target	computer	from	this

bootable	device,	it	will	virtually	modify	parts	of	Windows	kernel	to	load	the	operating
system	in	a	special	mode	where	you	will	not	be	insisted	to	enter	the	password.	The
advantage	of	this	tool	is	that	all	the	changes	are	temporary	and	disappear	after	reboot,	so
that	everything	looks	normal	thereafter	and	does	not	arouse	suspicion	of	a	possible
security	breach.
	

DUMPING	THE	PASSWORD	HASHES
After	understanding	some	of	the	techniques	to	gain	access	to	the	system	without	knowing
the	password,	it	is	time	to	move	on	one	step	further	and	find	out	a	means	to	crack	the
actual	password	itself.	If	it	is	required	to	gain	access	to	the	target	system	multiple	times
over	a	period,	it	is	always	a	good	idea	to	unveil	the	password	by	cracking	it	so	that	you
can	easily	login	to	the	system	by	entering	the	password	thereby	eliminating	the	need	to
reset	the	password	each	time	you	want	to	gain	access.
Windows	user	account	passwords	are	converted	into	a	cryptographic	hash	format	called
NTLM	(NT	LAN	MANAGER)
	hash.	This	
NTLM	
hash	along	with	the	user	profile
details	is	stored	in	a	special	file	called	
Security	Accounts	Manager
	or	
SAM
.	The	
SAM
file	is	further	encrypted	with	the	
syskey
	which	is	stored	in	a	file	called	
SYSTEM
.	Both
SAM
	and	
SYSTEM
	are	located	in	the	drive	where	the	Windows	in	installed	(usually	C:)
under	the	following	path:	
\windows\system32\config
.
In	order	to	crack	the	password,	it	is	necessary	to	extract	the	
NTLM
	hash	and	user
accounts	details	stored	in	the	
SAM
	file	from	the	target	system	which	is	known	as
dumping.	The	dumped	details	are	transferred	to	the	hacker’s	computer	and	the	password	is
cracked	using	an	offline	password	cracking	tool.	The	following	are	the	two	ways	to	dump
password	hashes:
	
Dumping	Hashes	With	Administrator	Access
If	you	have	administrator	access	to	the	system	on	which	you	want	to	dump	password
hashes,	you	can	use	a	handy	tool	called	
PWDUMP
.	This	is	an	open-source	command-line
tool	to	quickly	dump	password	hashes	onto	a	text	file.	The	tool	can	be	downloaded	from
the	link	below:
PWDUMP:	
http://www.tarasco.org/security/pwdump_7/
	
This	is	a	very	small	tool	which	is	less	than	a	MB	in	size	and	can	be	carried	to	the	target
location	in	a	USB	thumb	drive.	To	dump	the	hashes,	just	open	the	command	prompt	with
administrator	rights,	navigate	to	the	location	of	the	tool	(PwDump7.exe)	and	run	the
following	command:
PwDump7.exe	>>	
targetfilename.txt
	
As	shown	in	the	below	snapshot,	I	am	running	the	
PwDump.exe
	from	my	USB	thumb
drive	(
M:
)	and	dumping	the	hash	details	in	a	file	called	
hash.txt
.	This	file	should	get
created	in	the	same	directory	from	which	
PwDump.exe
	is	running.
	


Figure	8.	9
	
The	
hash.txt
	file	contains	a	list	of	existing	user	accounts	on	the	machine	and	their
corresponding	
NTLM
	hashes	as	shown	below:
	
Figure	8.	10
	
Dumping	Hashes	Without	Administrator	Access
The	previous	section	shows	how	to	dump	password	hashes	when	you	already	have
administrator	access	to	the	target	machine.	What	if	you	do	not	have	administrator	access?
In	this	case,	you	can	use	your	
Kali	Linux
	Live	DVD	to	boot	up	the	system	and	load	the
Linux.	From	here,	access	the	drive	on	which	the	Windows	OS	is	installed	and	navigate	to
\windows\system32\config\
.	From	here	copy	the	two	files	
SAM
	and	
SYSTEM
	on	to	your
USB	device	so	that	you	can	carry	them	to	your	computer	for	offline	password	cracking.
	
Figure	8.	11
	

CRACKING	THE	WINDOWS	PASSWORD
After	successfully	dumping	the	password	hashes,	we	can	now	easily	crack	them	using
different	tools	and	approaches	as	mentioned	below:
	
Using	Rainbow	Tables
As	discussed	in	the	previous	chapter,	a	rainbow	table	contains	a	list	of	pre-computed
hashes	that	can	be	instantly	compared	against	the	dumped	password	hash	to	crack	the
password.	This	is	so	far	the	best	and	the	fasted	method	to	successfully	crack	the	Windows
password.	For	this	we	will	use	an	open-source	tool	called	
Ophcrack
	that	can	be
downloaded	from	the	link	below:
Ophcrack	Website	:	
http://ophcrack.sourceforge.net/
	
From	the	above	link,	download	the	installable	version	of	
Ophcrack
	(not	the	Live	CD
version)	and	install	it	on	your	system.	During	the	installation	process,	when	the	option
comes	up	to	download	rainbow	tables,	uncheck	them	all	and	just	install	the	program.	It	is
always	better	to	download	the	rainbow	tables	separately.
	
Figure	8.	12
	
Once	you	have	it	installed	on	your	system,	go	to	the	
Ophcrack	website
	from	the	above
link	and	click	on	
Tables
	in	the	navigation	menu.	Here	you	should	see	a	list	of	rainbow
tables	you	can	download.
If	you	want	to	crack	the	passwords	of	
Windows	XP
	and	prior	operating	systems	download
the	tables	from	the	
LM	hashes
	section.	For	operating	systems	after	XP	such	as	
Windows
Vista
,	
7
	and	
8
	
download	the	tables	from	the	
NT	hashes
	section.
	

Figure	8.	13
Figure	8.	14
	
Figure	8.	15

Figure	8.	16
	
As	shown	in	the	above	snapshots,	as	the	character	set	increases	the	size	of	the	table	grows
bigger.	Bigger	the	table	higher	the	chance	of	successful	cracking.	You	can	download	the
one	that	best	matches	your	needs.	For	the	purpose	of	demonstration,	I	am	using	the	“Vista
proba	free”	table	on	my	Windows	8	machine	with	
Ophcrack
.	Here	is	a	step-by-step	guide
on	how	to	use	this	tool	to	crack	passwords.
	
1
.	
Open	the	
Ophcrack
	tool	by	double-clicking	the	icon	on	the	desktop.
	
2
.	
From	the	main	
Ophcrack
	window,	click	on	“Tables”	button	and	select	the	table	that
you	have	downloaded	from	the	list.	Now	click	on	“Install”	button,	load	the	folder	that
contains	the	downloaded	tables	and	click	on	“OK”.
	
	
Figure	8.	17
	
	
3
.	
Next,	to	load	the	dumped	password	hashes,	click	on	“Load”	button,	select
“PWDUMP	file”	option	and	load	the	
hash.txt
	file	obtained	by	running	the
PWDUMP	tool	on	target	machine.	If	you	have	
SAM
	and	
SYSTEM
	files	instead	of
hash.txt
,	you	can	choose	the	option	
Encrypted	SAM
	instead	of	“PWDUMP	file”
and	select	the	folder	which	contains	those	two	files.
	

Figure	8.	18
	
	
4
.	
When	everything	is	loaded	and	ready	as	shown	in	the	above	snapshot,	click	on
“Crack”	button	and	site	back	patiently.	The	cracking	process	will	take	from	anywhere
between	few	minutes	to	few	hours	to	complete	depending	upon	the	size	of	the	table
and	strength	of	the	password.	If	it	is	successful,	the	cracked	password	will	be
displayed	along	with	the	time	taken	to	crack	as	shown	below:
	
Figure	8.	19
	
If	you	become	unsuccessful	in	cracking	the	password,	you	may	try	a	different	rainbow
table	that	covers	more	characters	and	long	passwords.
	
Using	Brute-Force	Approach
Even	though	using	rainbow	tables	is	by	far	the	fastest	and	the	best	approach	to	crack
passwords,	it	may	not	be	successful	for	long	and	strong	passwords	as	hash	tables	for	such
passwords	are	hard	to	find.	So,	brute-force	approach	becomes	inevitable	under	these
situations.	But	remember	it	may	take	a	very	long	time	ranging	from	a	few	hours	to	few

days	to	complete	the	cracking	process.	Since	
Ophcrack
	is	not	so	effective	for	the	brute-
force	approach,	we	will	use	another	powerful	tool	called	
L0phtCrack
	which	is	available
from	the	link	below:
L0PhtCrack	Download:	
http://www.l0phtcrack.com/download.html
	
After	installing	
L0phtCrack
,	Click	on	“Import	hashes”	button	from	the	main	window	to
load	the	hashes.	You	have	the	option	to	load	the	hashes	from	both	the	“PWDUMP	file”	as
well	as	“SAM	file”.
	
Figure	8.	20
	
Click	on	the	“Session	Options”	button	to	further	configure	different	auditing	options	such
as	dictionary	and	brute-force	attacks.	You	can	enable	or	disable	specific	attacks	and	also
customize	character	set,	password	length	and	range	options	for	brute-force	approach.
Configuring	the	auditing	options	wisely	can	avoid	unnecessary	time	delay	and	thereby
speed	up	the	password	cracking	process.
Once	you	are	done	with	loading	the	hashes	and	configuring	the	options,	click	on	the
“Begin”	button.	This	will	initiate	the	cracking	process	and	the	time	consumed	to	crack	the
password	depends	on	various	factors	like	the	password	strength	(length	+	presence	of
alphanumeric	+	special	characters),	type	of	attack	(dictionary,	hybrid	or	brute-force)	and
the	speed	of	your	computer.
If	the	password	cracking	process	is	successful	you	should	see	the	cracked	password	next
to	the	user	name	in	the	
L0phtCrack
	window	as	shown	below:
	

Figure	8.	21
	
Sniffing	Password	Hashes	on	a	Network
If	your	computer	is	on	a	network	such	as	office	or	school,	it	is	possible	to	remotely	import
the	password	hashes	of	other	computers	on	the	network	without	the	need	to	gain	physical
access	to	them.	This	method	is	called	sniffing	and	
L0phtCrack
	6	and	above	supports	this
option.
To	sniff	password	hashes	from	other	computers,	just	click	on	the	“Import	From	Sniffer”
button	on	the	main	window.		If	more	than	one	network	interface	is	detected,	the	“Select
Network	Interface”	dialog	box	allows	you	to	choose	the	interface	to	sniff	on.	After
choosing	your	interface,	the	“SMB	Packet	Capture	Output”	dialog	box	appears	where	you
need	to	click	on	“Start	Sniffing”.
If	the	hashes	are	captured,	they	are	immediately	displayed	in	the	dialog	box	after	which
you	can	hit	“Stop	Sniffing”	and	click	on	“Import”	button	to	load	the	password	hashes	for
cracking.
	

COUNTERMEASURES
In	order	to	secure	your	Windows	computer	from	all	those	possible	attacks	as	mentioned	in
this	chapter,	the	following	are	some	of	the	countermeasures	that	you	need	to	follow:
	
Do	not	allow	strangers	to	access	your	computer	during	your	absence.
	
If	the	computer	is	on	a	public	network	such	as	school	or	office,	password	protect
those	accounts	with	administrator	access	and	only	give	limited	accounts	to	the	users.
	
Always	use	a	strong	password	that	is	hard	to	guess.	Strong	passwords	contain	a	mix
of	alphanumeric	and	special	characters	that	are	long	enough	to	avoid	rainbow	table
and	brute-force	approaches.
	
Disable	access	to	CD/DVD	drives	and	USB	devices	on	public	networks.
	
Configure	BIOS	to	disable	booting	from	USB,	CD/DVD	and	other	portable	devices.
	
Password	protect	your	computer	BIOS	so	that	it	would	not	be	possible	for	an	attacker
to	modify	its	settings	and	gain	access.

Chapter	9	-	Malware
	
Malware	is	a	collective	term	used	to	represent	virus,	worms,	spyware	and	other	malicious
programs	out	there	on	the	Internet.	In	simple	words,	any	software	program	that	is	intended
to	cause	direct	or	indirect	harm	to	the	computer	system	is	referred	to	as	a	malware.
Some	malware	programs	can	cause	serious	problems	such	as	destroying	the	system	files,
causing	disruption	to	the	computer	operation	or	gathering	sensitive	information	while
others	may	only	have	a	light	impact	such	as	redirecting	websites	to	load	pornographic
content	or	annoying	the	users	with	pop-ups	and	banners.
	

MALWARE	VARIANTS	AND	COMMON	TECHNIQUES
Once	the	hacker	has	gained	access	to	the	target	and	has	administrator	privileges	on	it,	the
following	are	some	of	the	malware	programs	that	he	can	use	to	take	further	control	of	the
system:

	
Computer	Virus
As	we	all	know,	this	is	the	type	of	malware	that	has	become	highly	popular	and	is	one	of
the	most	widely	discussed	topic	in	the	field	of	computer	security.	A	
virus
	is	just	a
computer	program	that	is	designed	to	take	unauthorized	control	of	the	infected	computer
so	as	to	cause	harm	to	the	system’s	data	or	degrade	its	performance.
	
Mode	of	Operation:
Computer	viruses	operates	by	attaching	themselves	to	an	already	existing	file	or	program
and	replicates	itself	to	spread	from	one	computer	to	another.	In	most	cases,	they	tend	to
infect	executable	files	that	are	parts	of	legitimate	programs.	So,	whenever	the	infected	file
is	executed	on	a	new	computer,	the	virus	gets	activated	and	begins	to	operate	by
replicating	further	or	causing	the	intended	damage	to	the	system.
A	virus	cannot	perform	its	task	of	harming	and	replication	unless	it	is	allowed	to	execute.
This	is	the	reason	why	viruses	often	choose	an	executable	file	as	its	host	and	get	attached
to	them.	Viruses	are	mainly	classified	into	two	types:
Non-Resident	Viruses:
	This	kind	of	virus	will	execute	along	with	its	host,	perform	the
needful	action	of	finding	and	infecting	the	other	possible	files	and	eventually	transfers	the
control	back	to	the	main	program	(host).	The	operation	of	the	virus	will	terminate	along
with	that	of	its	host.
Resident	Viruses:	
In	case	of	resident	viruses,	whenever	the	infected	program	is	run	by	the
user,	the	virus	gets	activated,	loads	its	replication	module	into	the	memory	and	then
transfers	the	control	back	to	the	main	program.	In	this	case,	the	virus	still	remains	active	in
the	memory	waiting	for	an	opportunity	to	find	and	infect	other	files	even	after	the	main
program	(host)	has	been	terminated.
	
Damages	Caused:
Viruses	are	known	to	cause	destruction	of	data	and	software	programs.	In	some	cases,	a
virus	may	do	nothing	other	than	just	replicating	itself.	However,	they	are	responsible	for
using	a	large	portion	of	the	system	resources	such	as	CPU	and	memory	which	results	in
the	performance	degradation	of	the	computer.
	
Worms
Worms
	are	standalone	computer	programs	with	a	malicious	intent	that	spread	from	one
computer	to	another.	Unlike	viruses,	worms	have	the	ability	to	operate	independently	and
hence	do	not	attach	themselves	to	another	program.
	
Mode	of	Operation:
Worms	often	use	a	computer	network	to	spread	itself	by	exploiting	the	security
vulnerabilities	that	exist	inside	the	individual	computers.	In	most	cases,	worms	are
designed	only	to	spread	without	causing	any	serious	change	to	the	computer	system.

	
Damages	Caused:
Unlike	viruses,	worms	do	not	cause	damage	to	the	system	files	and	other	important
programs.	However,	they	are	responsible	for	consuming	the	bandwidth	thereby	degrading
the	performance	of	the	network.
	
Remote	Administration	Tools	(RATs)
A	
remote	administration	tool
	(
RAT
)	is	a	piece	of	software	that	allows	a	hacker	to
remotely	take	control	of	the	target	system	to	execute	commands	and	carry	out	operations
on	it.	With	the	help	of	RATs	a	hacker	can	control	the	target	system	as	if	he	has	physical
access	to	it.
	
Mode	of	Operation:
A	RAT	can	be	installed	manually	by	the	attacker	when	he	gets	administrator	access	to	a
system.	They	can	also	be	attached	to	other	malicious	programs	like	a	trojan	horse	to
deliver	it	to	the	target	system.	Once	installed	a	RAT	can	immediately	allow	the	hacker	to
remotely	take	control	of	the	system.
	
Damages	Caused:
With	the	help	of	a	RAT,	an	attacker	can	carry	out	the	following	operations	on	the	target
system:
	
	
Watch	Live	screen	activities	and	capture	screenshots.
Read/Write/Upload/Download	files	and	folders.
Install/Uninstall	additional	malware	programs.
Modify	Registry	such	as	add/edit/delete	entries.
Power	off/Reboot	the	system.
As	you	can	see	from	the	above	list,	there	is	virtually	no	operation	that	the	attacker	cannot
perform	with	the	use	of	a	RAT.	Some	of	the	examples	of	popular	RATs	include	
PsTools
,
Radmin
	and	
LogMeIn
.
	
Keystroke	Loggers
A	
keystroke	logger
	(or	simply	known	as	a	
keylogger
)	is	a	program	that	is	designed	to
record	every	keystroke	typed	on	the	computer’s	keyboard.
	
Mode	of	Operation:
A	keylogger	program	can	be	installed	manually	with	physical	access	to	the	system	or

remotely	using	a	other	programs	like	RAT.	Once	the	installation	is	complete	a	keylogger
operates	in	a	complete	stealth	mode	by	hiding	itself	from	well	known	places	such	as	the
programs	folder,	system	tray,	add/remove	programs,	task	manager	etc.	so	that	the	victims
of	the	computer	will	remain	unaware	of	its	presence.
	
Damages	Caused:
A	keylogger	will	capture	every	keystroke	typed	on	the	computer’s	keyboard	including
passwords,	bank	logins,	credit	card	details,	emails,	chat	conversation	etc.	and	stores	the
logs	in	a	safe	place	so	as	to	be	accessible	only	to	the	attacker.	Some	keyloggers	can	also
send	the	logs	via	email	or	upload	them	to	the	hacker’s	FTP	account.
Some	of	the	popular	keystroke	loggers	include	
Elite	Keylogger
,	
Powered	Keylogger
	and
Actual	Keylogger
.
	
Spyware
Spyware
	is	a	type	of	malicious	software	that	can	collect	information	about	the	activities	of
the	target	computer	without	the	knowledge	of	its	users.	Most	spyware	programs	also	come
pre-loaded	with	a	keylogger	which	makes	them	more	powerful.	These	type	of	programs
are	often	installed	by	the	owner	or	administrator	of	the	computer	in	order	to	monitor	the
activities	of	the	users	on	it.	This	can	be	a	parent	trying	to	monitor	his/her	child	or	a
company	owner	trying	to	monitor	their	employees.	Unfortunately,	it	can	also	be	used	by
hackers	and	criminals	to	spy	on	users	of	their	target	machines.
	
Mode	of	Operation:
Spywares	are	designed	to	operate	in	a	totally	stealth	mode	so	that	its	presence	is
completely	hidden	from	the	users	of	the	computer.	Once	installed,	they	silently	monitor	all
the	activities	of	the	computer	such	as	keystrokes,	web	activity,	screenshots,	emails,	IM
logs	etc.	These	logs	are	stored	secretly	for	later	access	or	uploaded	online	so	that	the
installer	of	the	spyware	program	can	have	access	to	them.
	
Damages	Caused:
Apart	from	monitoring,	spywares	do	not	cause	any	damage	to	the	computer.	However,	in
some	cases	the	affected	computer	may	experience	degradation	in	its	performance.
SniperSpy
,	
SpyAgent
	and	
WebWatcher
	are	some	of	the	examples	of	popular	spyware
programs.
	
Rootkits
Rootkit
	is	a	special	type	of	malicious	program	designed	by	the	hacker	to	hide	certain
programs	like	spyware,	keyloggers	and	other	processes	from	normal	methods	of	detection
so	as	to	enable	continued	privileged	access	to	the	target	computer.
	
Mode	of	operation:

Rootkits	are	often	installed	by	the	attacker	as	soon	as	he	gains	administrator	level	access
to	the	target.	Rootkits	operate	by	modifying	the	kernel	of	the	operating	system	itself	which
makes	it	really	hard	to	detect.
	
Damage	caused:
Rootkits	cause	a	serious	damage	to	the	system	as	it	modifies	the	OS	kernel	to	carry	out
operations.	Unless	it	is	removed	completely,	it	can	be	very	dangerous.
	
Trojan	Horse
A	
trojan	horse
	or	simply	called	as	
trojan
	is	a	type	of	malicious	program	that	disguises
itself	as	something	that	is	legitimate	or	useful.	The	main	purpose	of	a	trojan	is	to	gain	the
trust	of	the	user	by	disguising	itself	as	a	useful	program	or	other	utility,	so	that	it	gets	the
permission	to	be	installed.	But,	from	the	back	end	it	is	designed	to	grant	unauthorized
control	of	the	computer	to	the	hacker	by	installing	a	RAT,	Spyware	or	a	Rootkit.
	
Mode	of	Operation:
A	Trojan	horse	do	not	depend	on	the	host	to	carry	out	its	operation.	So,	unlike	a	computer
virus,	it	does	not	tend	to	attach	itself	to	other	files.	Trojans	are	often	disguised	as	video
codec,	software	cracks,	keygens	and	other	similar	programs	downloaded	from	untrusted
sources.	So,	one	has	to	be	careful	about	those	untrusted	websites	that	offer	free
downloads.
One	of	the	most	popular	example	is	the	
DNSChanger
	Trojan
	that	was	designed	to	hijack
the	DNS	servers	of	the	victimized	computers.	It	was	distributed	by	some	of	the	rogue
pornographic	websites	as	a	video	codec	needed	to	view	online	content.
	
Damages	Caused:
Trojan	horses	are	known	to	cause	a	wide	variety	of	damages	such	as	stealing	passwords
and	login	details,	electronic	money	theft,	logging	keystrokes,	modifying	or	deleting	files,
monitoring	user	activity	and	so	on.
	

COUNTERMEASURES
The	following	are	some	of	the	countermeasures	that	you	can	take	to	prevent	malware
attack	on	your	systems:
	
Deploy	a	two-way	firewall	which	manages	both	inbound	as	well	as	outbound	traffic.
Install	a	good	antivirus	program	and	keep	it	up	to	date.	Periodically	run	full	system
scans	to	detect	and	remove	keylogger,	spyware	and	rootkits.
Keep	up	to	date	on	all	security	software	patches.	Use	automatic	updates	to	keep	your
Windows	patched	for	latest	threats	and	vulnerabilities.
Install	additional	security	programs	such	as	antispyware,	anti-keyloggers	and	anti-
rootkits.
Run	with	least	privilege.	Log	in	as	administrator	only	when	required.	For	lighter
activities	like	browsing	the	Internet	and	reading	emails	login	with	an	account	that	has
limited	access.
Scan	unknown	programs	with	an	up	to	date	antivirus	software	before	installing	them
on	your	system.
Take	periodic	backups	of	your	system	so	that	in	case	of	data	loss	or	damage	from
malware	you	could	easily	revert	back	to	a	previous	date	of	normal	working	condition.

Chapter	10	-	Hiding	Information
	
Once	the	hackers	gain	access	and	take	control	of	the	system,	the	next	step	they	may	try	to
do	is	to	hide	some	critical	files	and	information	on	it.	The	hacker	may	decide	to	hide	files
for	later	execution	or	use	the	victim’s	compromised	system	to	store	information	secretly	so
that	it	can	be	accessed	later	and	sent	to	the	final	destination	where	it	is	intended	to	go.	In
this	chapter	we	will	discuss	some	of	the	popular	techniques	to	hide	files	and	information
on	a	system.	Let	us	start	with	the	simple	ones	and	gradually	advance	to	more	complex
techniques.
	

WINDOWS	HIDDEN	ATTRIBUTE
Using	the	Windows	built-in	hidden	attribute	is	by	far	the	simple	and	easiest	way	to	hide
files	and	folders	on	a	system.	To	enable	hidden	attribute	just	follow	the	instructions	as
given	below:
	
1
.	
Right-click	on	the	file	or	folder	that	you	intend	to	hide	and	select	“Properties”	from
the	pop-up	menu.
	
2
.	
In	the	“Properties”	window,	under	the	“Attributes”	section	check	the	box	which	says
“Hidden”	and	click	on	“OK”.
	
This	will	make	the	selected	file	or	folder	go	invisible.	To	view	the	hidden	files	and	folders
follow	the	instruction	below:
	
1
.	
Open	the	“Control	Panel”	by	clicking	the	“Start”	button
	
	
2
.	
Now	click	on	“Appearance	and	Personalization”	and	then	on	“Folder	Options”.
	
	
3
.	
Switch	to	“View”	tab,	check	the	option	“Show	hidden	files,	folders	and	drives”	under
“Advanced	Settings”	and	click	on	“OK”.
	
This	should	unhide	all	the	hidden	files	and	folders.	However,	the	drawback	of	this	method
is	that	most	users	are	aware	of	this	and	hence	the	hidden	files	can	easily	be	uncovered.	In
order	to	counter	this	drawback,	some	of	the	advanced	information	hiding	methods	are
discussed	below.
	

NTFS	ALTERNATE	DATA	STREAMS
Alternate	Data	Stream
	
(ADS)
	is	a	Windows	hidden	stream	supported	on	NTFS	file
system	used	to	store	metadata	of	a	file	such	as	attributes,	word	count,	access	and
modification	time	etc.	Whenever	a	file	is	created	on	NTFS	file	system,	Windows
automatically	creates	an	ADS	for	it.	Even	in	directory	listing	only	the	actual	file	is	visible
but	its	ADS	is	kept	hidden.
It	is	even	possible	to	add	additional	ADS	to	an	existing	file	to	store	hidden	information	in
it.	Hackers	often	use	this	technique	to	store	malicious	codes	in	compromised	systems
without	the	knowledge	of	the	victims.
Suppose	if	you	want	to	hide	information	inside	an	image	or	any	other	file,	just	follow	the
steps	mentioned	below:
	
1
.	
Open	the	Windows	command	prompt.
	
2
.	
Type	the	following	command	and	hit	Enter.
	
Command	Syntax:	
notepad	
file-name:ADS-name
	
	
	
Example	Command:	
notepad	
flowers.jpg:hiddeninfo
	
	
Figure	10.	1
	
As	shown	in	the	above	snapshot,	I	am	issuing	the	above	command	on
flowers.jpg
	present	inside	the	folder	named	
Hidden	Info
.
	
3
.	
Now	Windows	will	create	a	new	
ADS
	for	the	specified	file	and	open	it	in	a	new
notepad	with	a	message	window	“Do	you	want	to	create	a	new	file?”	as	shown
below.
	

Figure	10.	2
	
	
4
.	
Click	on	“Yes”,	and	type	the	content	that	you	wish	to	hide	on	to	it	and	once	you	are
done	save	and	close	the	notepad.
	
5
.	
Now,	all	your	secret	message	will	be	stored	in	a	new	
ADS
	called	
hiddeninfo
	inside
the	file	
flowers.jpg
.
	
To	the	outside	world,	the	
flowers.jpg
	is	just	an	image	file	but	only	the	hacker	know	that	it
contains	hidden	data	inside	it.	Even	if	the	file	is	moved	to	another	system	(NTFS	only),	it
still	carries	the	hidden	information	along	with	it.
To	view	the	hidden	info	all	you	need	to	do	is	again	type	the	same	command	as	
notepad
flowers.jpg:hiddeninfo
	in	the	command	prompt.	This	will	open	up	the	
ADS
	contained
inside	the	
flowers.jpg
	file	in	a	notepad	displaying	all	the	hidden	text	that	was	previously
stored.
ADS
	technique	has	a	small	drawback!	If	this	file	is	copied	or	moved	on	to	a	different	file
system	such	as	
FAT32
,	all	the	
ADS
	information	will	be	dropped	and	the	hidden
information	will	be	lost.
	


[Note: PDF has 160 pages, only first 100 pages extracted]