CRYSTAL PANEK
WILLIAM PANEK, MICROSOFT MVP EXAM 70-740, EXAM 70-741, EXAM 70-742, AND EXAM 70-743
Provides 1,000 practice questions that include 3 practice exams 
covering all sections of the MCSA Windows Server 2016 objective domains. 
Complements the  MCSA Windows Server 2016 Complete Study Guide: 
Exam 70-740, Exam 70-741, Exam 70-742, and upgrade Exam 70-743.MCSA
WINDOWS SERVER® 2016 
PRACTICE TESTS

MCSA
Windows Server  ® 2016 
Practice Tests:
Exams 70-740, 70-741, 70-742,  
and 70-743
William Panek  
Crystal Panek

Senior Acquisitions Editor: Kenyon Brown
Development Editor: Kezia Endsley
Technical Editor: Chris Crayton
Senior Production Editor: Christine O’Connor 
Content Enablement and Operations Manager: Pete Gaughan
Executive Editor: Jim Minatel
Production Manager: Kathleen Wisor
Book Designers: Judy Fung and Bill Gibson
Copy Editor: Elizabeth Welch
Proofreader: Louise Watson, Word One New York
Indexer: Jack Lewis 
Project Coordinator, Cover: Brent Savage
Cover Designer: Wiley
Cover Image: Getty Images Inc./ Jeremy Woodhouse
Copyright © 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
ISBN: 978-1-119-52528-8
ISBN: 978-1-119-52530-1 (ebk.)
ISBN: 978-1-119-52529-5 (ebk.)
Manufactured in the United States of America
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or 
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permit-
ted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written 
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the 
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978)  
646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or 
online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions .
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author make no representations or war-
ranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim 
all warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty 
may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein 
may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not 
engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance is required, 
the services of a competent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author 
shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Web site is referred to in this 
work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the 
publisher endorses the information the organization or Web site may provide or recommendations it may 
make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Web sites listed in this work may have changed or 
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support, please contact 
our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at (877) 762-2974, outside the U.S. at (317) 572-3993 or 
fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material 
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. 
If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, 
you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com . For more information about Wiley 
products, visit www.wiley.com .
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018964332
TRADEMARKS: Wiley, the Wiley logo, and the Sybex logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates, in the United States and other countries, and may not be used 
without written permission. Windows Server is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All other 
trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any 
product or vendor mentioned in this book.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my wife and best friend, Crystal. She is always the light at the end of 
my tunnel. I want to thank my two daughters, Alexandria and Paige, for all of their love 
and support during the writing of all my books. The three of them are my support system 
and I couldn’t do any of this without them.
I want to thank all of my family and friends who always help me when I’m writing my 
books. I want to thank my brothers, Rick, Gary, and Rob. I want to thank my great friends 
Shaun, Jeremy, and Gene.
We want to thank everyone on our Sybex team, especially our development editor, Kezia 
Endsley, who helped make this the best book possible, and Chris Crayton, our technical 
editor. It’s always good to have the very best technical person backing you up. I also want 
to thank Christine O’Connor, our production editor, and Elizabeth Welch, our copy editor.
Special thanks to our acquisitions editor, Kenyon Brown, who was the lead for the entire 
book. Finally, we want to thank everyone else behind the scenes who helped make this 
book possible. It’s truly an amazing thing to have so many people work on my books to 
help make them the very best. I can’t thank you all enough for your hard work.
—Will Panek
I would like to second Will’s sentiments and thank all the same individuals. I would like to 
personally thank my husband and best friend, Will, because without him I would not be 
where I am today—thank you! I would also like to express my love to my two daughters, 
who have always shown nothing but love and support for everything we do.
—Crystal PanekThis book is dedicated to Alexandria and Paige. We couldn’t ask for  
better kids.

About the Authors
William Panek   holds the following certifications: MCP, MCP+ I, 
MCSA, MCSA+ Security and Messaging, MCSE-NT (3.51 & 4.0), 
MCSE 2000, 2003, 2012/2012 R2, 2016, MCSE+ Security and 
Messaging, MCDBA, MCT, MCTS, MCITP, CCNA, CCDA, and 
CHFI. Will is also a five-time Microsoft MVP winner.
After many successful years in the computer industry, Will decided 
that he could better use his talents and his personality as an instruc-
tor. He began teaching for schools such as Boston University and the 
University of Maryland, just to name a few. He has done consulting and training for some 
of the biggest government and corporate companies in the world, including the United 
States Secret Service, Cisco, the United States Air Force, and the United States Army.
In 2015, Will became a Senior Microsoft Instructor for StormWind Studios  
(www.stormwindstudios.com ). He currently lives in New Hampshire with his wife 
and two daughters. Will was also a representative in the New Hampshire House of 
Representatives from 2010 to 2012. In his spare time, he likes to do blacksmithing, 
shooting (trap and skeet), golf, racquetball, and ride his Harley. Will is also a commer -
cially rated helicopter pilot.
Crystal Panek   holds the following certifications: MCP, MCP+ I, 
MCSA, MCSA+ Security and Messaging, MCSE-NT (3.51 & 4.0), 
MCSE 2000, 2003, 2012/2012 R2, 2016, MCSE+ Security and 
Messaging, MCDBA, MCTS, and MCITP.
For many years she trained as a contract instructor, teaching at such 
places as MicroC, Stellacon Corporation, and the University of New 
Hampshire. She then became the vice president for a large IT training 
company, and for 15 years she developed training materials and course-
ware to help thousands of students get through their certification exams. She currently 
works on a contract basis, creating courseware for several large IT training facilities.
Crystal resides in New Hampshire with her husband and two daughters. In her spare 
time, she likes to camp, hike, shoot trap and skeet, golf, bowl, and snowmobile.


About the Technical Editor
Chris Crayton,   MCSE, CISSP, CASP, CySA+, A+, N+, and S+, is a technical consultant, 
trainer, author, and industry leading technical editor. He has worked as a computer tech-
nology and networking instructor, information security director, network administrator, 
network engineer, and PC specialist. Chris has authored several print and online books 
on PC repair, CompTIA A+, CompTIA Security+, and Microsoft Windows. He has also 
served as technical editor and content contributor on numerous technical titles for several 
of the leading publishing companies. He holds numerous industry certifications, has been 
recognized with many professional and teaching awards, and has served as a state-level 
SkillsUSA final competition judge.

Contents at a Glance
Introduction  xiii
Chapter 1 I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and  
Compute Environments  1
Chapter 2 I mplement Storage Solutions  23
Chapter 3 I mplement Hyper-V  45
Chapter 4 I mplement Windows Containers  71
Chapter 5 I mplement High Availability  89
Chapter 6 I mplement Domain Name System (DNS)  113
Chapter 7 I mplement Network Connectivity and  
Remote Access Solutions  137
Chapter 8 I mplement an Advanced Network Infrastructure  161
Chapter 9 I nstall and Configure Active Directory Domain  
Services (AD DS)  185
Chapter 10 I mplement Identity Federation and Access  
Solutions  211
Chapter 11 P ractice Exam 70-740: Installation, Storage,  
and Compute with Windows Server 2016  235
Chapter 12 P ractice Exam 70-741: Networking with  
Windows Server 2016  251
Chapter 13 P ractice Exam 70-742: Identity with Windows  
Server 2016  267
Appendix   A nswers to Practice Tests  283
Index  395

Contents
Introduction  xiii
Chapter 1 I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and  
Compute Environments  1
Chapter 2 I mplement Storage Solutions  23
Chapter 3 I mplement Hyper-V  45
Chapter 4 I mplement Windows Containers  71
Chapter 5 I mplement High Availability  89
Chapter 6 I mplement Domain Name System (DNS)  113
Chapter 7 I mplement Network Connectivity and  
Remote Access Solutions  137
Chapter 8 I mplement an Advanced Network Infrastructure  161
Chapter 9 I nstall and Configure Active Directory Domain 
Services (AD DS)  185
Chapter 10 I mplement Identity Federation and Access  
Solutions  211
Chapter 11 Practice Exam 70-740: Installation, Storage,  
and Compute with Windows Server 2016  235
Chapter 12 Practice Exam 70-741: Networking with  
Windows Server 2016  251
Chapter 13 Practice Exam 70-742: Identity with Windows  
Server 2016  267
Appendix    Answers to Practice Tests  283
Chapter 1:  Installing Windows Servers in Host  
and Compute Environments  284
Chapter 2:  Implement Storage Solutions  291
Chapter 3:  Implement Hyper-V  299
Chapter 4:  Implement Windows Containers  309

xii Contents
Chapter 5:  Implement High Availability  315
Chapter 6:  Implement Domain Name System (DNS)  323
Chapter 7:  Implement Network Connectivity and  
Remote Access Solutions  333
Chapter 8:  Implement an Advanced Network Infrastructure  343
Chapter 9:  Install and Configure Active Directory  
Domain Services (AD DS)  353
Chapter 10:  Implement Identity Federation and Access Solutions  363
Chapter 11:  Practice Exam 70-740: Installation, Storage,  
and Compute with Windows Server 2016  375
Chapter 12:  Practice Exam 70-741: Networking with  
Windows Server 2016  381
Chapter 13:  Practice Exam 70-742: Identity with  
Windows Server 2016  387
Index  395

Introduction
This book is drawn from more than 20 years of IT experience and Microsoft testing. We 
have taken that experience and translated it into a Windows Server 2016 book that will 
help you prepare for the MCSA: Windows Server 2016 exams.
Microsoft Windows Server 2016 is the newest version of Microsoft’s server operating 
system software. Microsoft has taken the best of Windows Server 2003, Windows Server 
2008, and Windows Server 2012 and combined them into the latest creation, Windows 
Server 2016.
Windows Server 2016 eliminates many of the problems that plagued the previous ver-
sions of Windows Server, and it includes a much faster boot time and shutdown. It is also 
easier to install and configure, and it barely stops to ask the user any questions during 
installation. In this book, we will show you what features are installed during the auto-
mated installation and where you can make changes if you want to be more in charge of 
your operating system and its features.
The Microsoft Certification Program
Since the inception of its certification program, Microsoft has certified more than two 
million people. As the computer network industry continues to increase in both size 
and complexity, this number is sure to grow—and the need for proven ability will also 
increase. Certifications can help companies verify the skills of prospective employees and 
contractors.
The Microsoft certification tracks for Windows Server 2016 include the following:
MCSA: Windows Server 2016   The MCSA is now the lowest-level certification you can 
achieve with Microsoft in relation to Windows Server 2016. It requires passing three 
exams: 70-740, 70-741, and 70-742.
MCSE: Cloud Platform and Infrastructure   The MCSE certifications, in relation  
to Windows Server 2016, require that you become an MCSA first and then pass two 
additional exams. The additional exams will vary depending on which of the two  
MCSE tracks you choose. For more information, visit Microsoft’s website at  
www.microsoft.com/learning .
How Do You Become Certified on Windows Server 2016?
Attaining Microsoft certification has always been a challenge. In the past, students have 
been able to acquire detailed exam information—even most of the exam questions—from 
online “brain dumps” and third-party “cram” books or software products. For the new 
generation of exams, this is simply not the case.

xiv Introduction
 Microsoft has taken strong steps to protect the security and integrity of its new certi-
fi  cation tracks. Now prospective candidates must complete a course of study that devel-
ops detailed knowledge about a wide range of topics. It supplies them with the true skills 
needed, derived from working with the technology being tested. 
 The new generations of Microsoft certifi  cation programs are heavily weighted toward 
hands-on skills and experience. Microsoft recommends that candidates have troubleshoot-
ing skills acquired through hands-on experience and working knowledge. 
 Fortunately, if you are willing to dedicate the time and effort to learn Windows Server 
2016, you can prepare yourself well for the exam by using the proper tools. By working 
through this book, you can successfully meet the requirements to pass the Windows Server 
2016 exams.   
 MCSA Exam Requirements 
 Candidates for MCSA certifi  cation on Windows Server 2016 must pass at least the follow-
ing three Windows Server 2016 exams: 
■ ■   70-740: Installation, Storage, and Compute with Windows Server 2016 
■ ■   70-741: Networking with Windows Server 2016 
■ ■   70-742: Identity with Windows Server 2016   
        
 Those who have a qualifying certification can take the Upgrading exam 
“Upgrading Your Skills to MCSA: Windows Server 2016” 
(Exam 70-743). The objectives for this exam span the three individual 
exams. This book covers all of the objectives for the Upgrading exam. 
For details about the exam, visit Microsoft’s website at  www.microsoft
.com/learning  .   
 Microsoft provides exam objectives to give you a general overview of possible areas of 
coverage on the Microsoft exams. Keep in mind, however, that exam objectives are sub-
ject to change at any time without prior notice and at Microsoft’s sole discretion. Visit the 
Microsoft Learning website ( www.microsoft.com/learning  ) for the most current listing of 
exam objectives. The published objectives and how they map to this book are listed later in 
this introduction. 
        
 For a more detailed description of the Microsoft certification programs, 
including a list of all the exams, visit the Microsoft Learning website at: 
www.microsoft.com/learning  .     

Introduction  xv
Tips for Taking the Windows Server 2016 Exams
Here are some general tips for achieving success on your certification exam:
■ ■Arrive early at the exam center so that you can relax and review your study materials. Dur -
ing this final review, you can look over tables and lists of exam-related information.
■ ■Read the questions carefully. Do not be tempted to jump to an early conclusion. Make 
sure you know exactly  what the question is asking.
■ ■Answer all questions. If you are unsure about a question, mark it for review and come 
back to it at a later time.
■ ■On simulations, do not change settings that are not directly related to the question. 
Also, assume the default settings if the question does not specify or imply which set-
tings are used.
■ ■For questions about which you’re unsure, use a process of elimination to get rid of 
the obviously incorrect answers first. This improves your odds of selecting the correct 
answer when you need to make an educated guess.
Exam Registration
As of December 31, 2014, Microsoft ended its relationship with Prometric, its old testing 
centers, and all exams are now delivered through the more than 1,000 Authorized VUE 
Testing Centers around the world. For the location of a testing center near you, go to VUE’s 
website at www.vue.com . If you are outside of the United States and Canada, contact your 
local VUE registration center.
Find out the number of the exam that you want to take and then register with the VUE 
registration center nearest to you. At this point, you will be asked for advance payment for 
the exam. The exams are $165 each, and you must take them within one year of payment. 
You can schedule exams up to six weeks in advance or as late as one working day prior to 
the date of the exam. You can cancel or reschedule your exam if you contact the center at 
least two working days prior to the exam. Same-day registration is available in some loca-
tions, subject to space availability. Where same-day registration is available, you must regis-
ter a minimum of two hours before test time.
When you schedule the exam, you will be provided with instructions regarding appoint-
ment and cancellation procedures, ID requirements, and information about the testing cen-
ter location. In addition, you will receive a registration and payment confirmation letter.
Microsoft requires certification candidates to accept the terms of a nondisclosure agree-
ment before taking certification exams.
Who Should Read This Book?
This book is intended for individuals who want to earn their MCSA: Windows Server 2016 
certification.

xvi Introduction
This book will not only help anyone who is looking to pass the Microsoft exams, it will 
also help anyone who wants to learn the real ins and outs of the Windows Server 2016 
operating system.
What’s Inside?
Here is a glance at what’s in each chapter:
Chapter 1: Installing Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments   In the first 
chapter, we cover questions on how to install, upgrade, and migrate servers and work-
loads, install and configure Nano Server, and create, manage, and maintain images for 
deployment.
Chapter 2: Implement Storage Solutions   This chapter asks questions on how to implement 
server storage and implement data deduplication.
Chapter 3: Implement Hyper-V   We take you through questions on how to install and con-
figure Hyper-V, configure virtual machine (VM) settings, configure Hyper-V storage, and 
configure Hyper-V networking.
Chapter 4: Implement Windows Containers   This chapter asks questions on how to deploy 
and manage Windows Containers.
Chapter 5: Implement High Availability   This chapter takes you through questions on how 
to implement high availability and disaster recovery options in Hyper-V, implement and 
manage failover clustering, implement Storage Spaces Direct, and manage Virtual Machine 
movement in clustered nodes.
Chapter 6: Implement Domain Name System (DNS)   In this chapter, you will see different 
questions that cover how to install and configure DNS servers and implement and maintain 
IP Address Management (IPAM).
Chapter 7: Implement Network Connectivity and Remote Access Solutions   In this chapter 
we cover questions on how to implement virtual private network (VPN) and DirectAccess 
solutions.
Chapter 8: Implement an Advanced Network Infrastructure   This chapter includes ques-
tions on how to implement high-performance network solutions and determine scenarios 
and requirements for implementing Software Defined Networking (SDN).
Chapter 9: Install and Configure Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS)   This chapter 
shows you questions on how to install and configure domain controllers.
Chapter 10: Implement Identity Federation and Access Solutions   In this chapter we cover 
questions on how to install and configure Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS), 
implement Web Application Proxy (WAP), and install and configure Active Directory 
Rights.

Introduction  xvii
What’s Included with the Book
This book includes many helpful items intended to prepare you for the MCSA: Windows 
Server 2016 certification.
Objectives   These questions are mapped directly with the exam objectives. This will help 
you prepare for the different exam questions.
Sybex Test Engine   Readers can access the Sybex Test Engine, which includes the assess-
ment test and chapter review questions in electronic format. In addition, there are a total 
of three practice exams included with the Sybex test engine: one each for Exams 70-740, 
70-741, and 70-742.
How to Contact Sybex or the Authors
Sybex strives to keep you supplied with the latest tools and information you need for your 
work. Please check the website at www.sybex.com/go/mcsawin2016 , where we’ll post addi-
tional content and updates that supplement this book, should the need arise.
You can contact Will by going to his website at www.willpanek.com . You can also 
watch free videos on Microsoft networking at www.youtube.com/c/williampanek . If you 
would like to follow information about Windows Server 2016 from Will Panek, please visit 
Twitter @AuthorWillPanek.
Good luck on the exam. We’re hoping this book helps you pass.

Installing Windows 
Servers in Host 
and Compute 
Environments
TH E follo WIng MCSA W IndoWS SErvEr 
2016 Ex AM TopICS ArE CovErEd In THIS  
CHApTEr:
✓ ✓1.1 I nstall, upgrade, and migrate servers and workloads
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Determine 
Windows Server 2016 installation requirements; determine 
appropriate Windows Server 2016 editions per workloads; 
install Windows Server 2016; install Windows Server 2016 
features and roles; install and configure Windows Server 
Core; manage Windows Server Core installations using 
Windows PowerShell, command line, and remote manage-
ment capabilities; implement Windows PowerShell Desired 
State Configuration (DSC) to install and maintain integrity of 
installed environments; perform upgrades and migrations 
of servers and core workloads from Windows Server 2008 
and Windows Server 2012 to Windows Server 2016; deter-
mine the appropriate activation model for server installation, 
such as Automatic Virtual Machine Activation (AVMA), Key 
Management Service (KMS), and Active Directory-Based 
Activation
✓ ✓1.2 I nstall and configure Nano Server
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Determine 
appropriate usage scenarios and requirements for Nano 
Server; install Nano Server; implement Roles and Features 
on Nano Server; use Nano Server Image Builder; manage and 
configure Nano Server; manage Nano Server remotely using 
MMC, Windows PowerShell, and Server Management ToolsChapter 
1

✓ ✓1.3 Create, manage, and maintain images for deployment
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Plan 
for Windows Server virtualization; assess virtualization 
workloads using the Microsoft Assessment and Planning 
(MAP) Toolkit; determine considerations for deploying 
workloads into virtualized environments; update images 
with patches, hotfixes, last cumulative updates, and driv -
ers; install roles and features in offline images; manage and 
maintain Windows Server Core, Nano Server images, and 
VHDs using Windows PowerShell

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  3
1. Y ou are the administrator for your company network and you are looking to install 
Windows Server 2016. You need to decide which version would best fit your environment. 
You maintain a small office that has only 10 users and about 20 devices. Which version of 
Windows Server would fit your needs?
A. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter
B. Windows Server 2016 Essentials
C. Windows Server 2016 Standard
D. Windows Server 2016 Web Server Core
2. You are the administrator for your company network and you need to figure out what 
installation type of Windows Server 2016 you want to use. You are looking for a server 
type that is designed for private clouds and datacenters that will allow you to remotely 
administer the server operating system. What version should you install?
A. Windows Server 2016 (Desktop Experience)
B. Windows Server 2016 Server Core
C. Windows Server 2016 Nano Server
D. Windows Server 2016 Web Server Core
3. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. You want to configure Server1 as a multitenant RAS Gateway. What 
should you install on Server1?
A. Network Policy and Access Services server role
B. Remote Access server role
C. Data Center Bridging feature
D. Network Controller server role
4. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. This server hosts a line-of-business application named App1. App1 
has a memory leak that occasionally causes it to consume an excessive amount of memory. 
You want to log the event in the Application event log whenever this application consumes 
more than 4 GB of memory. What should you do?
A. Create a system configuration information data collector.
B. Create a performance counter data collector.
C. Create a performance counter alert data collector.
D. Create an event trace data collector.
5. You are the administrator for your company network. You have just finished installing 
Windows Server 2016 on a new server. Your colleague has informed you that it is essential 
that you activate Windows Server. Which of the following command-line tools can be used 
to activate Windows Server?
A. Netdom C:\windows\system32\slmgr.vbs -ato
B. Netsh C:\windows\system32\slmgr.vbs -ato
C. Ocsetup C:\windows\system32\slmgr.vbs -ato
D. Cscript C:\windows\system32\slmgr.vbs -ato

4 Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments
6. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
Nano Server. You know that with Nano Server some packages are installed directly with 
their own Windows PowerShell switches (such as -Compute ) whereas others are installed by 
passing package names to the -Packages  parameter that can combine them in a comma-
separated list. If you want to add IIS to your Nano Server, what command should you use?
A. -Compute
B. -Packages
C. -Containers
D. -Storage
7. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have decided to install Windows 
Server 2016 by choosing the Server Core Installation option. What tools would you use if 
you want to install, configure, or uninstall server roles remotely?
A. Windows PowerShell
B. Server Manager
C. Remote Server Administration Tools (RSAT)
D. All of the above
8. You are the administrator for your company network. Your network contains an Active 
Directory domain called abc.com . You want to create a Nano Server image named Nano1 
that will be used as a virtualization host. The Windows Server 2016 source files are located 
in drive D. What Windows PowerShell cmdlet should you run?
A. New-NanoServerImage –Edition Datacenter –DeploymentType Host –Defender 
–EnableEMS –MediaPath 'D:\' –TargetPath C:\Nano1\Nano1.wim –ComputerName 
Nano1 –DomainName abc.com
B. New-NanoServerImage –Edition Datacenter –DeploymentType Host –Package 
Microsoft-NanoServer-SCVMM-Package –MediaPath 'D:\' –TargetPath C:\
Nano1\Nano1.wim –ComputerName Nano1 –DomainName abc.com
C. New-NanoServerImage –Edition Datacenter –DeploymentType Host –Package 
Microsoft-ServerCore-Compute-Package –MediaPath 'D:\' –TargetPath C:\
Nano1\Nano1.wim –ComputerName Nano1 –DomainName ABC
D. New-NanoServerImage –Edition Datacenter –DeploymentType Host –Compute 
–MediaPath 'D:\' –TargetPath C:\Nano1\Nano1.wim –ComputerName  
Nano1 –DomainName abc.com
9. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a physical Nano Server 
machine that runs Windows Server 2016. You have not installed any packages on this 
machine. You decide to attach a new disk and then initialize the disk as a GUID Partition 
Table (GPT) disk. What should you do first if you need to create a ReFS-formatted volume 
on the new disk?
A. From the physical server, log on to the Nano Server Recovery Console.
B. Install the Microsoft-NanoServer-Host-Package  package.
C. Run the Format-Volume  cmdlet and specify the -FileSystem  switch.
D. Install the Microsoft-NanoServer-Storage-Package  package.

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  5
10. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You create a Nano Server image 
named Nano1.vhdx  by using the New-NanoServerImage  cmdlet and attach it to a Genera-
tion 1 virtual machine named Nano1. When you start Nano1, you get an error message that 
states, “Boot failure. Reboot and select proper Boot device or Insert Boot Media in selected 
Boot device.” What should you do to successfully start the Nano Server?
A. Attach Nano1.vhdx  to a SCSI controller.
B. Recreate Nano1 as a Generation 2 virtual machine.
C. Increase the memory of Nano1 to 512 MB.
D. Modify the BIOS settings of Nano1.
11. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Nano Server image 
named Disk1.vhdx . You mount Disk1.vhdx . What tool or cmdlet should you use if you 
need to add a folder that contains several files to the image?
A. Copy-Item
B. Add-WindowsImage
C. Add-WindowsPackage
D. Edit-NanoServerImage
12. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. You use the Basic template to create a new data collector set named 
CollectorSet1 on this server. What should you do before you start CollectorSet1 if you need 
to configure it to generate performance alerts?
A. Modify the performance counter data collector of CollectorSet1.
B. Add a new data collector to CollectorSet1.
C. Modify the configuration data collector of CollectorSet1.
D. Add a new task to CollectorSet1.
13. You are the administrator for your company network. Your network contains an  
Active Directory forest named ABC Company. The forest has a Distributed File System  
(DFS) namespace named \\abccompany.com\namespace1 . The domain contains a file  
server named FS1 that runs Windows Server 2016. You create a folder named  
Folder1  on FS1. Which two cmdlets should you use? (Choose two.)
A. New-DfsnFolderTarget
B. Install-WindowsFeature
C. Grant-DfsnAccess
D. New-DfsnFolder
E. New-SmbShare

6 Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments
14. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have two Windows Server 2016 
servers named Server1 and Server2. There is a firewall between the two servers. Both serv-
ers run Windows Server Update Services (WSUS). Server1 downloads updates from Micro-
soft Update. What port should be open on the firewall if Server2 must synchronize updates 
from Server1?
A. 80
B. 443
C. 3389
D. 8530
15. You are the administrator for your company network. You administer a large network, 
and a colleague installs a new machine with Windows Server 2016 Datacenter Server 
Core. It is determined that it should have been Windows Server 2016 Datacenter (Desktop 
Experience). What should you do?
A. On the same machine, reinstall the Windows Server 2016 Datacenter Server Core.
B. Install Windows Server 2016 Datacenter Server Core on a new machine.
C. Convert the current Windows Server 2016 Datacenter Server Core to the Windows 
Server 2016 Datacenter (Desktop Experience) version.
D. Dual-boot the machine with both Windows Server 2016 Datacenter Server Core and 
Windows Server 2016 Datacenter (Desktop Experience).
16. You are the administrator for your company network. You are looking to upgrade Win-
dows Server 2012 Standard with GUI to Windows Server 2016. If you want to maintain the 
GUI interface, what version of Windows Server 2016 does Microsoft recommend?
A. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter (Desktop Experience)
B. Windows Server 2016 Standard (Desktop Experience)
C. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter
D. Windows Server 2016 Standard
17. You are the administrator for your company network. You administer a network that has 
a Nano Server named Nano1. You want to see if the DNS Server role is installed on this 
machine. What cmdlet should you use?
A. Find-NanoServerPackage
B. Get-Package
C. Find-Package
D. Get-WindowsOptionalFeature
18. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. Your network contains an Active 
Directory domain. There is a company policy that indicates that new servers should run 
Nano Server whenever possible. What server role can be deployed on Nano Server?
A. Active Directory Domain Services
B. DHCP Server
C. Network Policy and Access Services
D. Web Server (IIS)

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  7
19. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on creating an 
answer file. What should you name the answer file so that it will work with unattended 
installations?
A. Autounattend.txt
B. Autounattend.xls
C. Autounattend.xml
D. Autounattend.docx
20. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. You create a Nano Server image named Disk1.vhdx . You need 
to start Server1 by using Disk1.vhdx . What three actions should you perform? (Choose 
three.)
A. Restart Server1.
B. Run the bcdboot.exe  command.
C. Run the bootcfg.exe  command.
D. Run the Edit-NanoServerImage  cmdlet.
E. Mark a partition as active.
F. Mount Disk1.vhdx .
21. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. The server has an application named App1 that writes entries to the 
Application event log when errors are encountered. The events have IDs of either 111 or 
112. What should you do to restart the service whenever one of these events is logged?
A. Run the Get-SMServerEvent  cmdlet and pipe the output to the Start-NetEvent  using 
Windows PowerShell.
B. Use create task to create one task that includes triggers for both event IDs from Task 
Scheduler.
C. Create a custom view that has a filter for the event IDs from Event Viewer.
D. Run the Write-EventLog  cmdlet and specify the -EventID  parameter using Windows 
PowerShell.
22. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a server named Server1 
that is an iSCSI target. You have a server named Server2 that runs Windows Server 2016. 
Server2 has an iSCSI disk named Disk1. Disk1 contains one volume that is assigned a drive 
letter of E:. What should you do if you need to increase the size of Disk1?
A. Run the Resize-Partition  cmdlet and specify the -ComputerName  Server2 
parameter.
B. Run the Resize-IscsiVirtualDisk  cmdlet and specify the -ComputerName  Server2 
parameter.
C. Run the Resize-IscsiVirtualDisk  cmdlet and specify the -ComputerName  Server1 
parameter.
D. Run the Resize-Partition  cmdlet and specify the -ComputerName  Server1 parameter.

8 Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments
23. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are deciding on an upgrade 
path. You are currently using Windows Server 2012 R2 Standard in your environment. 
What is the recommended upgrade path you should choose? (Choose all that apply.)
A. Windows Server 2016 Standard
B. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter
C. Windows Server 2016 Essentials
D. Windows Storage Server 2016
24. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1 that has Windows Defender enabled. Server1 runs an applica-
tion named App1 that stores various types of files in Microsoft OneDrive and Microsoft 
SharePoint Online. App1 also interacts with several local services. What should you do on 
Server1 if you need to prevent Windows Defender from scanning any files opened by App1?
A. In Windows Defender, modify the real-time protection settings.
B. In Windows Defender, modify the cloud-based protection settings.
C. Run the New-AppLockerPolicy  cmdlet.
D. From the Windows Defender settings, configure a process exclusion.
25. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 server 
named Server1. A Microsoft Azure Backup of Server1 is created automatically every day. What 
cmdlet should you run if you need to view the items that are included in the backup?
A. Get-OBPolicyState
B. Get-OBJob
C. Get-OBPolicy
D. Get-WBSummary
26. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. A Microsoft Azure Backup of Server1 is created automatically every 
day. You rename Server1 to Server2. You discover that backups are no longer being created 
in Azure. You need to ensure that the server is backed up to Azure. What should you do?
A. Upload the Server2 certificate as a management certificate from the Azure 
Management Portal.
B. Run the Start-OBRegistration  cmdlet on Server2.
C. Run the Add-WBBackupTarget  cmdlet on Server2.
D. Modify the configuration on the backup vault from the Azure Management Portal.
27. You are the administrator for your company network and you are planning on upgrading 
your Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter with GUI machine to Windows Server 2016. 
The company is planning on virtualizing 25 servers. What version of Windows Server 2016 
should you upgrade to while maintaining the GUI interface?
A. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter (Desktop Experience)
B. Windows Server 2016 Standard (Desktop Experience)
C. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter
D. Windows Server 2016 Standard

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  9
28. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
Windows Server 2016 Server Core. Windows Server 2016 Server Core has many benefits. 
Which of the following are some of the benefits of using Windows Server 2016 Server Core? 
(Choose all that apply.)
A. Reduced management
B. Minimal maintenance
C. Smaller footprint
D. Tighter security
29. You are the administrator for your company network and you are looking to save hard 
drive space on the Windows Server 2016 Datacenter machine. What feature can you use to 
help you save hard disk space?
A. HDSaver.exe
B. F eatures On Demand
C. ADDS
D. WinRM
30. You are the administrator for your company network. If physical security is a concern in an 
area, what type of domain controller should you install?
A. Primary domain controller
B. Backup domain controller
C. Read-only domain controller
D. Locked-down domain controller
31. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. The Windows Server 2016 installation media is mounted as drive D. 
You copy the NanoServerImageGenerator  folder from the D:\NanoServer  folder to the 
C:\NanoServer  folder. You create a custom Nano Server image that includes the Hyper-
V server role. What two commands should you run if you want this image to be used to 
deploy Nano Servers to physical servers? (Choose two.)
A. New-NanoServerImage –Edition Standard –DeploymentType Guest –MediaPath 
D:\-TargetPath \NanoServerImage\NanoServer.wim -Compute
B. Install-PackageProvider NanoServerPackage
C. Import-PackageProvider NanoServerPackage
D. New-NanoServerImage –Edition Standard –DeploymentType Host –MediaPath 
D:\ -TargetPath \NanoServerImage\NanoServer.wim -Compute
E. Import-Module C:\NanoServer\NanoServerImageGenerator

10 Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments
32. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are trying to decide if you’d 
like to install a Windows Server 2016 Nano Server on the network. What are some good 
options that Nano Server would be ideal for? (Choose all that apply.)
A. A DNS server
B. As a storage machine for file servers
C. A do main controller
D. Systems Center Data Protection Manager
E. NIC Teaming
F. An IIS server
G. An application server for cloud-based applications
33. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Hyper-V host named 
Server1 that runs Windows Server 2016. The installation source files for Windows Server 
are located in D:\Source . You need to create a Nano Server image. Which cmdlets should 
you run? (Choose all that apply.)
A. Add-WindowsImage
B. Import-Module
C. Install-Module
D. New-NanoServerImage
E. New-WindowsCustomImage
34. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Hyper-V host named 
Server1 that runs Windows Server 2016. Server1 hosts a virtual machine named VM1. 
What should you do first if you need to provide VM1 with direct access to a graphics pro-
cessing unit (GPU) on Server1?
A. On Server1, disable the display adapter device.
B. Add a RemoteFX 3D Video Adapter in the settings of VM1.
C. Install the Quality Windows Audio Video Experience (qWave) feature on VM1.
D. On Server1, dismount the display adapter.
35. You are the administrator for your company network. You are preparing an image of 
Windows Server 2016. You notice that the image is missing the driver for a network 
adapter. This is required in your environment. You need to ensure that the image contains 
the network adapter driver. What three cmdlets should you use? (Choose three.)
A. Mount-WindowsImage
B. Add-WindowsDriver
C. Get-WindowsImage
D. Save-WindowsImage
E. Add-WindowsFeature
F. Dismount-WindowsImage
G. Optimize-WindowsImage

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  11
36. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. You plan to use Windows Server Backup to back up all of the data 
on Server1. You create a new volume on Server1. You need to ensure that the new volume 
can be used as a backup target. The backup target must support incremental backups. 
Which of the following could you do? (Choose three.)
A. Mount the volume to C:\Backup  and format the volume by using NTFS.
B. Mount the volume to C:\Backup  and format the volume by using ReFS.
C. Mount the volume to C:\Backup  and format the volume by using FAT32.
D. Mount the volume to C:\Backup  and format the volume by using exFAT.
37. You are the administrator for your company network. You have Hyper-V virtual 
machines that run 50 web servers, 10 Microsoft SQL Server servers, 10 file servers, and 
8 domain controllers. You need to implement a backup strategy that meets the following 
requirements:
✓■Backs up all servers
✓■Centralizes application-level backups
✓■Performs application-level backups
✓■Provides the ability to perform bare metal recovery
What should you use?
A. Microsoft Azure VM Backup
B. Microsoft Azure Backup Agent
C. Windows Server Backup
D. Microsoft Azure Backup Server
38. You are the administrator for your company network. Your company has two main offices. 
One of the offices is located in Boston and the other in New York. All servers at both loca-
tions run Windows Server 2016. In the New York office, there is a Distributed File System 
(DFS) server named DFS1. DFS1 has a folder named Folder1  that contains large Windows 
image files. In the Boston office, you deploy a DFS server named DFS2, and you then rep-
licate Folder1  to DFS2. After several days, you find out that the replication of certain files 
failed to complete. What should you do if you need to ensure that all of the files in Folder1  
can replicate to DFS2?
A. On the drive that contains Folder1 , modify the disk quota.
B. Run dfsutil /purgemupcache  from a command prompt.
C. Using File Server Resource Manager (FSRM), create a quota for Folder1 .
D. On Folder1 , modify the size of the staging area.

12 Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments
39. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. Your company has two main offices. 
One of the offices is located in Boston and the other in New York. All servers at both loca -
tions run Windows Server 2016. In the New York office, there is a Distributed File System 
(DFS) server named DFS1. DFS1 has a folder named Folder1  that contains large Windows 
image files. In the Boston office, you deploy a DFS server named DFS2, and you then rep -
licate Folder1  to DFS2. Users in both offices frequently add files to Folder1 . You moni -
tor DFS Replication and discover excessive replication over the WAN link during business 
hours. You want to reduce the amount of bandwidth used for replication during business 
hours. What should you do to ensure that the users can continue to save content to Folder1 ?
A. On DFS2, modify the quota settings for Folder1 .
B. Modify the properties of the replication group.
C. On DFS2, configure the copy of Folder1  as read-only.
D. On DFS1, modify the replicated folder properties of Folder1 .
40. You are the administrator for your company network. You are looking to use the Windows 
Server Migration Tools. Where must this feature be installed?
A. On the source computer only
B. On the destination computer only
C. On both the source and destination computers
D. On the main administrative server
41. You deploy a Hyper-V server named Server1 in an isolated test environment. The test envi-
ronment cannot access the Internet. Server1 runs Windows Server 2016 Datacenter edition. 
You plan to deploy the following guest virtual machines on the server.
Quantity Operating System Domain Member
10 Windows Server 2012 R2 Yes
4 Windows Server 2016 No
5 Windows Server 2016 Yes
For the virtual machines, which activation model should you use?
A. Multiple Activation Key (MAK)
B. Automatic Virtual Machine Activation (AVMA)
C. Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) key
D. Key Management Service (KMS)
42. You are the administrator for your company network. You want to install a role that allows 
you to build PKI and provide public key cryptography. What role do you install?
A. Active Directory Certificate Services (AD CS)
B. Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS)
C. Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS)
D. Active Directory Rights Management Services (AD RMS)

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  13
43. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You want to install a role that 
provides Internet-based clients with a secure identity access solution that works on both 
Windows and non-Windows operating systems. What role do you install?
A. Active Directory Certificate Services (AD CS)
B. Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS)
C. Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS)
D. Active Directory Rights Management Services (AD RMS)
44. You are the administrator for your company network. Your company purchases a laptop 
for an employee who travels frequently. The company wants to use BitLocker to secure the 
hard drive in case it is lost or stolen. While attempting to enable BitLocker, you receive an 
error message that states, “This device can’t use a Trusted Platform Module. Your admin-
istrator must set the Allow BitLocker Without a Compatible TPM option in the Require 
Additional Authentication at Startup policy for OS volumes.” Which of the following state-
ments is true?
A. A nonsupported configuration for BitLocker is possible on this laptop.
B. A supported configuration for BitLocker is possible on this laptop.
C. A supported configuration for BitLocker is not possible on this laptop.
D. A nonsupported configuration for BitLocker is not possible on this laptop.
45. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing the 
Windows Server Migration Tools using PowerShell on a Server Core installation of a Windows 
Server 2016. What command should you use to install the Windows Server Migration Tools?
A. New-MigrationTarget
B. Install-WindowsFeature
C. Grant-MigrationAccess
D. New-MigrationFolder
46. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on setting up NIC 
Teaming and you’d like to also set up fault protection. What is the minimum number of 
Ethernet adapters you must have?
A. One
B. Two
C. Three
D. Four
47. You are the administrator for your company network. Windows Server 2016 Nano Server 
is a lot like Server Core, but the advantage is that it is an even smaller installation of the 
operating system. Nano Server has no local logon or GUI capabilities, and it will allow 
only -bit applications and utilities.
A. 16
B. 32
C. 64
D. 128

14 Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments
48. Y ou are the administrator for your company network and you are planning on installing 
Nano Server. Nano Server is available for which two editions of Windows Server 2016? 
(Choose two.)
A. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter
B. Windows Server 2016 Essentials
C. Windows Server 2016 Standard
D. Windows Server 2016 Web Server Core
49. You are the administrator for your company network. You are trying to decide if install-
ing a Nano Server will work for your organization. There are some disadvantages of using 
Nano Server. Which of the following are some disadvantages? (Choose all that apply.)
A. It cannot act as a domain controller.
B. Group Policy Objects (GPOs) are not supported.
C. It cannot be configured to use System Center Configuration Manager.
D. It cannot be used as a proxy server.
E. All of the above.
50. You are the administrator for your company network. Your network contains a single 
Active Directory domain that has a Key Management Service (KMS) host. You deploy 
Windows Server 2016 to several laptops. You need to ensure that Windows Server 2016 is 
activated on the laptops immediately. Which command should you run?
A. ospp.vbs/act
B. slmgr.vbs/dli
C. slmgr.vbs/ato
D. ospp.vbs/dstatus
51. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on using Windows 
Deployment Services (WDS) to install a Windows operating system without using an instal-
lation disk. What is the first step you need to do when preparing the WDS server?
A. Configure and start WDS.
B. Install WDS.
C. Configure the WDS server to respond to client computers.
D. Make sure that the server meets the requirements of running WDS.
52. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on using Windows 
Deployment Services (WDS) to install a Windows operating system without using an instal-
lation disk. There are some requirements for using WDS. One of the requirements states 
that at least one of the partitions must be formatted as what type of file system?
A. FAT
B. NTFS
C. FAT32
D. ReFS

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  15
53. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on creating a Nano 
Server virtual hard disk (VHD). What is one of the easiest ways to create a Nano Server VHD?
A. Open the folder NanoServer  found on the physical media.
B. Use Nano Server Image Builder.
C. Use Windows PowerShell to install Nano Server.
D. Choose Basic Installation as the deployment type.
54. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Key Management Service 
(KMS) host and an administrative workstation named Computer1. From Computer1, you 
need to validate the activation status on a computer named Computer2. What should you 
run?
A. Get-RDLicenseConfiguration Computer2
B. slmgr.vbs computer2 /dlv
C. winrs.exe -r:Computer2 netdom.exe
D. ospp.vbs /tokact:computer2
55. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You need to create a script to verify 
the activation status on 100 computers. What should you use in the script?
A. The slmgr.vbs  script and the /dli  parameter
B. The sfc.exe  command and the /scannow  parameter
C. The slmgr.vbs  script and the /ipk  parameter
D. The sfc.exe  command and the /verifyonly  parameter
56. You are the administrator for your company network. You need to run slmgr.vbs  
remotely. What else must you include in the script in order for it to run properly? (Choose 
all that apply.)
A. The computer name of the target computer
B. The username of the account that has local administrator rights on the target computer
C. The password for the account that has local administrator rights on the target 
computer
D. The username of the account that has local administrator rights on the source 
computer
57. You are the administrator for your company network. What tool can you use to activate 
computers through the domain connection?
A. Automatic Virtual Machine Activation (AVMA)
B. Active Directory-Based Activation (ADBA)
C. Key Management Service (KMS)
D. Entering Licensing Keys

16 Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments
58. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are installing Windows Server 
2016 Nano Server. What type of servicing is currently the only option available for Nano 
Server?
A. Long-Term Servicing Branch (LTSB)
B. 5+5 servicing
C. Current Branch for Business (CBB)
D. Lifecycle Servicing Branch (LSB)
59. You are the administrator for your company network. Your company needs to install a ver-
sion of Windows Server 2016 that uses the Current Branch for Business servicing model. 
What version would you install?
A. Windows Server 2016 Nano Server
B. Windows Server 2016 Standard
C. Windows Server 2016 Essentials
D. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter
60. You are the administrator for your company network, and you are planning on using the 
WSDUTIL command-line utility to configure your Windows Deployment Services (WDS) 
server. What switch would you use if you wanted to initialize the configuration of the WDS 
server?
A. /enable
B. /copy-image
C. /uninitialized-server
D. /initialize-server
61. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on using Windows 
Deployment Services (WDS). What is one component that you must pay attention to when 
using WDS?
A. The boot firmware
B. The Preboot Execution Environment (PXE) network devices
C. How you create the image using the imgcrt tool
D. The type of computer data storage
62. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on using Windows 
Deployment Services (WDS). What network services must be running on the WDS server or 
be accessible to the WDS server from another network server? (Choose all that apply.)
A. TCP/IP installed and configured
B. A DHCP server
C. A DNS server
D. Active Directory

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  17
63. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are looking to install Windows 
Server 2016, and you need to decide which version to install. You need to install a version 
of Windows that is just for logon authentication and nothing else. You are looking for the 
most secure option, and cost is not an issue. Which version should you install?
A. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter (Desktop Experience)
B. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter Server Core
C. Windows Server 2016 Standard (Desktop Experience)
D. Windows Server 2016 Web Server
64. You are the administrator for your company network. You have been hired to help a small 
organization set up their first Windows network. They have had the same small number 
of employees during the short time they have been open. They currently have no plans for 
expansion. What version of Windows Server 2016 should you recommend?
A. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter (Desktop Experience)
B. Windows Server 2016 Standard (Desktop Experience)
C. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter
D. Windows Server 2016 Essentials
65. You are the administrator for your company network. Microsoft Windows Server 2016 offers 
two types of containers. One of the container types provides application isolation through 
process and namespace isolation technology. This container shares a kernel with the con -
tainer host and all containers running on the host. What container type is being described?
A. Hyper-V Container
B. Windows Server Container
C. Windows Full Container
D. Windows Limited Container
66. You are the administrator for your company network. You are looking at the Hyper-V role 
for Windows Server 2016. What does the Hyper-V role allow?
A. Network Load Balancing
B. The creation of Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)
C. Server virtualization
D. Updating Windows Server 2016
67. You are the administrator for your company network. You are looking at roles and fea-
tures to implement for Windows Server 2016. What is described here provides the point of 
automation needed for continual configuration, monitoring, and diagnostics of virtual net-
works, physical networks, network services, network topology, address management, and 
so on within a datacenter.
A. Host Guardian Service
B. Network Policy and Access Services
C. MultiPoint Services
D. Network Controller

18 Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments
68. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. You have a reference 
computer that runs Windows Server 2016. You need to create and deploy an image of the 
Windows Server 2016 computer. You create an answer file and name it answer.xml . You 
need to make sure that the installation applies the answer file after you deploy the image. 
Which command should you run before you capture the image?
A. ICD.exe /append answer.xml/check
B. ICD.exe /mount answer.xml/verify
C. Sysprep.exe/reboot/audit/unattend: answer.xml
D. Sysprep.exe/generalize/oobe/unattend: answer.xml
69. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Windows Image (WIM) that is mounted. What should you do if you need to display infor-
mation about the image?
A. Run DISM and specify the /get-ImageInfo  parameter.
B. Run Driverquery.exe  and use the /si parameter.
C. From Device Manager, view all hidden drivers.
D. From File Explorer, open the mount folder.
70. You are a network administrator for your company network. You need to deploy Windows 
Server 2016 to multiple computers. You want to automate the installation so that no user 
interaction is required during the installation process. Which of the following utilities could 
you use?
A. Image Capture Wizard
B. System Preparation Tool
C. WDSUTIL
D. Windows SIM
71. You are the administrator for your company network. You need to start a new installation 
of Windows Server 2016 using the command-line utility. You plan to accomplish this by 
using the Setup.exe  command-line setup utility, and you will be using an answer file with 
this command. What command-line option should you use?
A. /unattend
B. /apply
C. /noreboot
D. /generalize
72. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are using Sysprep.exe  to pre -
pare a system for imaging. What Sysprep option should you use if you want to restart the 
computer?
A. /generalize
B. /start
C. /restart
D. /reboot

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  19
73. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are using Sysprep.exe  to 
prepare a system for imaging. What Sysprep option should you use if you want to enable 
end users to customize their Windows operating systems, create user accounts, name their 
computers, and other tasks?
A. /generalize
B. /oobe
C. /audit
D. /unattend
74. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are looking to start an unat-
tended installation of Windows Server 2016. What command can be used to initiate the 
unattended installation?
A. setup.exe /answerfile:unattend
B. answerfile:unattend setup.exe
C. unattend: answerfile setup.exe
D. setup.exe /unattend:answerfile
75. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You run a classroom that needs the 
same software installed from scratch on the classroom computers each week. You decide to 
use Image Capture Wizard to deploy disk images. What Windows Server 2016 utility can 
you use along with Image Capture Wizard to create these disk images?
A. UAF
B. System Preparation Tool
C. Answer Manager
D. Setup Manager
76. You are the administrator for your company network. You are trying to decide whether 
you’d like to use WDS as a method of installing Windows Server 2016. Which of the fol-
lowing options is not an advantage to using a WDS automated installation?
A. Security is retained when you restart the computer.
B. The installation media does not need to be deployed to each computer.
C. Unique information is stripped out of the installation image so that it can be copied to 
other computers.
D. You can quickly recover the operating system in the event of a system failure.
77. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on deploying a new 
Windows Server 2016 image to a large number of client computers that are all similarly 
configured. You plan on using the Windows SIM tool to create an answer file that will be 
used to automate the installation. You want each computer to contain two partitions, one 
for the system partition and one as a data partition. What component of the answer file do 
you need to modify to support this configuration?
A. Windows PE
B. oobeSystem
C. auditSystem
D. specialize

20 Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments
78. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You need to install a group of  
25 computers by using disk images created in conjunction with the System Preparation 
Tool. You want to create an image from a reference computer first and then copy the image 
to the rest of the computers. What Sysprep.exe  command-line option should you use if 
you do not want to create a SID on the destination computer when you use the image?
A. /specialize
B. /generalize
C. /oobe
D. /quiet
79. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
the Microsoft Assessment and Planning (MAP) Toolkit. MAP is a utility that will locate 
computers on a network and then perform a thorough inventory of these computers. MAP 
uses which of the following utilities to obtain this inventory? (Choose all that apply.)
A. Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI)
B. Remote Registry Service
C. Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS)
D. Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
80. You are the administrator for your company network. When the Microsoft Assessment and 
Planning (MAP) Toolkit generates a report, what file format will the report be generated 
in? (Choose all that apply.)
A. A Microsoft Word document
B. A Microsoft Excel document
C. A Microsoft OneNote document
D. A Microsoft PowerPoint document
81. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on using the Sys-
prep utility to create images. Where can you find the Sysprep.exe  file?
A. \Windows\Setup\Sysprep
B. \Windows\Boot\Sysprep
C. \Windows\System\Sysprep
D. \Windows\System32\Sysprep
82. Y ou are the administrator for your company network and you have a computer named 
Computer1 that has a virtual hard disk (VHD) named Disk1.vhdx . You are going to con-
figure Computer1 for dual boot using Disk1.vhdx . You need to install Windows Server 
2016 on Disk1.vhdx  by using dism.exe . What should you run before you install Windows 
Server 2016?
A. Add-Windows Image
B. bcdboot.exe
C. bcdedit.exe
D. bootcfg.exe

Chapter 1  ■ I nstalling Windows Servers in Host and Compute Environments  21
E. bootim.exe
F. bootsect.exe
G. diskpart.exe
H. Expand-Windows Image
83. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are using the Deployment Image 
Servicing and Management (DISM) tool to manipulate an image. What DISM option 
should you use if you want to display information about images?
A. /Capture-Image
B. /List-Image
C. /Get-ImageInfo
D. /Apply-Image
84. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on performing an 
unattended installation for a large number of computers. What are some of the advantages 
of using an unattended installation? (Choose all that apply.)
A. It saves time and money.
B. It can be configured to provide automated responses.
C. It can be used to install clean copies or upgrade existing operating systems.
D. It can be expanded to include installation instructions.
E. The physical media does not need to be distributed to all the computers.
F. All of the above.
85. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on using Sysprep to 
set up images. You remember that the Windows activation clock starts to decrease as soon 
as Windows starts for the first time, but you can restart the clock. How many times are you 
allowed to restart the activation clock using Sysprep?
A. One
B. Two
C. Three
D. Four

Implement Storage 
Solutions
The follow Ing MCSA wIndow S Server 
2016 exAM TopICS Are Covered In ThIS 
ChApTer:
✓ ✓2.1 I mplement server storage
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Configure 
storage pools; implement simple, mirror, and parity storage 
layout options for disks or enclosures; expand storage 
pools; configure Tiered Storage; configure iSCSI target and 
initiator; configure iSNS; configure Data Center Bridging 
(DCB); configure Multipath I/O (MPIO); determine usage 
scenarios for Storage Replica: implement Storage Replica 
for server-to-server, cluster-to-cluster, and stretch cluster 
scenarios
✓ ✓2.2 I mplement Data Deduplication
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Implement 
and configure Deduplication; determine appropriate 
usage scenarios for Deduplication; monitor Deduplication: 
implement a backup and restore solution with DeduplicationChapter 
2

24 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
1. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. The server contains a storage pool named Pool1. Pool1 contains five 
physical disks named Disk1, Disk2, Disk3, Disk4, and Disk5. A virtual disk named VD1 is 
stored in Pool1. VD1 uses the parity storage layout. Which two commands should you run 
if you need to remove Disk3 after it fails from Pool1? (Choose two.)
A. Remove-PhysicalDisk-FriendlyName Disk3
B. Update-StoragePool-FriendlyName Pool1
C. Reset-PhysicalDisk-FriendlyName Disk3
D. Set-PhysicalDisk-FriendlyName Disk3-Usage Retired
E. Set-ResiliencySetting-StoragePool Pool1-PhysicalDiskRedundancyDefault 4
2. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have been asked to configure 
the company’s Windows Server 2016 domain controller. Company policy requires that all 
new computer accounts be placed in the General OU whenever computers join the domain. 
What command should you use to accomplish this?
A. Dsmove
B. Netdom
C. Redircmp
D. N one of these
3. You are the administrator for your company network. You have two Windows Server 2016 
servers named Server1 and Server2. Server1 contains a volume named Volume1. You decide 
to implement a Storage Replica that replicates the contents of Volume1 from Server1 and 
Server2. One day, Server1 fails. You need to ensure that you can access the contents of 
Volume1. What command/cmdlet should you run from Server2?
A. Set-SRPartnership
B. Update-StoragePool
C. vssadmin revert shadow
D. Clear-FileStorageTier
4. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discuss-
ing Windows Server 2016 platforms. The Windows Server 2016 platform can support two 
main filesystems. What are they? (Choose two.)
A. File Allocation Table (FAT)
B. File Allocation Table 32 (FAT32)
C. Windows NT File System (NTFS)
D. Resilient File System (ReFS)
5. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. Server1 has four SCSI disks and a storage pool named Pool1 that 
contains three disks. You create a virtual disk named VDisk1 that uses a mirrored layout. 

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  25
You create a partition named Partition1 that uses all of the available space on VDisk1. You 
want to extend Partition1. What should you do first?
A. Run the Expand-IscsiVirtualDisk  cmdlet from Windows PowerShell.
B. Run the Resize-VirtualDisk  cmdlet from Windows PowerShell.
C. Extend the volume from Disk Management.
D. Modify the properties of Partition1 from Disk Management.
6. You are the administrator for your company network. You have two Windows Server 
2016 servers named Server1 and Server2. You plan to implement Storage Replica to rep-
licate the contents of volumes on Server1 to Server2. What cmdlet should you run if you 
need to ensure that the replication traffic between the servers is limited to a maximum of 
100 Mbps?
A. Set-NetUDPSetting
B. New-StorageQosPolicy
C. Set-SmbBandwidthLimit
D. Set-NetTCPSetting
7. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a server and you want to 
provision a new volume that will be used to create large, fixed-size VHDX files. You want 
to minimize the amount of time required to create the VHDX files. What type of filesystem 
should you use on the new volume?
A. ReFS
B. NTFS
C. CVFS
D. exFAT
8. You are the administrator for your company network. The network contains an Active 
Directory domain. The domain contains a new file server named Server1 that runs a Server 
Core installation of Windows Server 2016. Server1 has an ReFS-formatted volume D: and 
NTFS-formatted volume E:. The volumes do not contain any data. You install the Data 
Deduplication role service on Server1. You want to implement Data Deduplication for vol-
umes on D: and E:. What should you do?
A. From Windows PowerShell, run Format-Volume D: -FileSystem EXFat and 
Enable-DeDupVolume -Volume D:,E:
B. F rom Windows PowerShell, run Format-Volume E: -FileSystem ReFS and 
Enable-DeDupVolume -Volume D:,E:
C. F rom Windows PowerShell, run Enable-DeDupVolume-Volume D:,E:
D. F rom Windows PowerShell, run Enable-DeDupVolume-Volume E: D:

26 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
9. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning to install Active 
Directory. What filesystem must you use in order to install Active Directory?
A. ReFS
B. exFAT
C. FAT
D. NTFS
10. You are the administrator for your company network. The network contains an Active 
Directory domain. The domain contains two servers named Server1 and Server2. Both serv-
ers have the same hardware configuration. What should you do if you need to asynchro-
nously replicate volume F: from Server1 to Server2?
A. Run New-SRPartnership  and specify the –ReplicationMode  parameter.
B. Install the Failover Clustering feature and create a new cluster resource group.
C. Install the Failover Clustering feature and use Cluster Shared Volumes (CSV).
D. Run Set-DfsrServiceConfiguration  and specify the –RPCPort  parameter.
11. You are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
the Master Boot Record (MBR). On the disk drive, a MBR has a partition table that indi-
cates where the partitions are located. How big are volumes that are supported by a MBR?
A. 1 TB (1,024 GB)
B. 2 TB (2,048 GB)
C. 3 TB (3,072 GB)
D. 4 TB (4,096 GB)
12. You are the administrator for your company network and you have a Windows Server 2016 
server. You install three additional physical disks named Disk1, Disk2, and Disk3. You 
want to use these physical disks to store data. You plan to create a volume to store data. 
What actions should you perform if you need to prevent data loss in the event of a single 
disk failure? (Choose three.)
A. Create a virtual disk.
B. Create a storage pool.
C. Create a new storage tier.
D. Create a volume.
E. Assign a single tier to a virtual disk.
F. Create a virtual disk clone.
13. You are the administrator for your company network. You have client computers that run 
Windows Server 2016. Each computer has two hard drives. Which kind of dynamic volume 
should you create if you need to create a dynamic volume on each computer that will maxi-
mize write performance and provide data fault tolerance?
A. Striped volume
B. RAID-5 volume
C. Spanned volume
D. Mirrored volume

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  27
14. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. The disks on Server1 are configured as shown in the following table:
Volume Type Filesystem Capability
C: Attached Locally NTFS 150 GB
D: Attached Locally exFAT 100 GB
E: Attached Locally NTFS 20 GB
F: Attached Locally ReFS 1 TB
G: iSCSI LUN NTFS 2 TB
Windows Server 2016 is installed in C:\Windows . You want to enable data deduplication. 
Which two volumes can you use for data deduplication? (Choose two.)
A. C:
B. D:
C. E:
D. F:
E. G:
15. You are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
using the convert  command. What does the command convert  d: /fs:ntfs  do?
A. Formats drive D to FAT.
B. Converts drive D from NTFS to FAT.
C. Converts drive D from FAT to NTFS.
D. Scans drive D for errors.
16. You are the administrator for your company network. You want to remove the host from 
the iSNS server. What command should you use?
A. iscsicli addisnsserver < server_name >
B. iscsicli removeisnsserver < server_name >
C. iscsicli refreshisnsserver < server_name >
D. iscsicli listisnsservers < server_name >
17. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You want to register the iSCSI initia-
tor manually to an iSNS server. What command should you use?
A. iscsicli addisnsserver < server_name >
B. iscsicli removeisnsserver < server_name >
C. iscsicli refreshisnsserver < server_name >
D. iscsicli listisnsservers < server_name >

28 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
18. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are looking at using shared 
folder permissions. Which of the following are true regarding shared folder permissions? 
(Choose all that apply.)
A. Apply to files
B. Apply to folders
C. Apply locally to the data
D. Apply remotely to the data
19. You are the administrator for your company network. You are trying to determine what the 
default TCP port for iSCSI is. Which one is it?
A. 21
B. 1433
C. 3260
D. 3389
20. You are the administrator for your company network. Matt is a member of both the 
Human Resources and Marketing departments. There is a shared folder called Apps  that 
everyone uses. Here are the current permissions on the Apps  shared folder:
Group/User NTFS Shared
Sales Read Deny
Marketing Modify Full Control
R&D Read Read
HR Full Control Deny
Admin Full Control Change
What will Matt’s local and remote permissions be when he logs into the Apps  folder?
A. Local = Full Control and Remote = Deny
B. Local = Deny and Remote = Deny
C. Local = Full Control and Remote = Change
D. Local = Change and Remote = Read
21. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
computer that has a shared folder named C:\Sales . The shared folder is on an NTFS 
volume. The current NTFS and share permissions are configured as follows: User1 is a 
member of both the Everyone group and the Sales group. User1 must access C:\Sales  from 
across the network. What permission should you set if you need to identify the effective 
permissions of User1 to the C:\Sales  folder?
A. Full Control
B. Read and Execute
C. Read
D. Modify

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  29
22. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer named Server1 
that runs Windows Server 2016. You add a 1 TB hard drive and create a new volume that 
has the drive letter D. You format the drive by using NTFS. You need to limit the amount 
of space that each user can consume on D: to 200 GB. Members of the Administrators 
group should have no limit. What actions should you perform? (Choose three.)
A. Set a default quota limit.
B. Run convert D: /FS:NTFS .
C. Run fsutil quota violations D: .
D. Enable the Deny disk space to users exceeding quota limit setting.
E. Add a quota entry.
23. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer that runs Win-
dows Server 2016. You add three new 3 TB disks and you want to create a new 9 TB vol-
ume. What two actions should you perform? (Choose two.)
A. Create a new spanned volume using Disk Management.
B. Convert all of the 3 TB disks to GPT using Disk Management.
C. Run the New-VirtualDisk  cmdlet using PowerShell.
D. Bring all the disks offline using Disk Management.
E. Run the convert MBR  command using Diskpart.
F. Run the Add-PhysicalDisk  cmdlet using PowerShell.
24. You are the administrator for your company network. Your network contains a single 
Active Directory domain. The domain contains two computers named Server1 and Server2. 
A user named User1 is a member of the local Administrators group on Server1 and Server2. 
User1 fails to remotely manage the devices on Server2 by using Device Manager on Server1. 
User1 can connect to Server2 remotely by using Computer Management. What do you need 
to do to ensure that User1 can disable a device on Server2 remotely?
A. On Server2, modify the Windows Firewall settings.
B. Enable Remote Desktop on Server2 and instruct User1 to use Remote Desktop.
C. On Server2, start the Plug and Play and Remote Registry services.
D. On Server2, enable the Allow remote access to the Plug and Play interface Group Policy 
setting.
25. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer that runs Win-
dows Server 2016. You install a second hard disk drive on the computer and create a new 
volume named E. What tool can you use to set up the new hard drive and volume?
A. The wbadmin  command
B. The Settings app
C. Computer Management
D. The Set-Volume  cmdlet

30 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
26. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer named Com-
puter1 that has a 1 TB volume named E. What tool should you use if you want to receive a 
notification when volume F has less than 100 GB of free space?
A. Performance Monitor
B. Disk Cleanup
C. System Configuration
D. Resource Monitor
E. Event Viewer
27. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer named Com-
puter1 that runs Windows Server 2016. Computer1 has two volumes named C and D. Vol-
ume C is formatted NTFS and volume D is formatted exFAT. What should you use if you 
need to ensure that you can recover files stored in D:\Data ?
A. System Restore points
B. File History
C. wbadmin.exe
D. B ackup and Restore
28. You are the administrator for your company network. You have two computers named 
Computer1 and Computer2 that run Windows Server 2016. You create a provisioning pack-
age named Package1  on Computer1. What file must be applied to Computer2 if you plan to 
apply the provisioning package to Computer2?
A. Package1.icdproj.xml
B. Customizations.xml
C. Package1.ppkg
D. Package1.cat
29. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer named 
Computer1 that has a virtual hard disk (VHD) named Disk1.vhdx . You plan to configure 
Computer1 for dual boot from Disk1.vhdx . You need to install Windows on Disk1.vhdx  
by using dism.exe . What should you run before you install Windows Server 2016?
A. Add-Windows Image
B. bcdboot.exe
C. bcdedit.exe
D. bootcfg.exe
E. bootim.exe
F. bootsect.exe
G. diskpart.exe
H. Expand-Windows Image

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  31
30. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer named 
Computer1. Computer1 has a virtual hard disk (VHD) named Disk1.vhdx . Windows is 
installed on Disk1.vhdx . In File Explorer, Disk1.vhdx  is visible as drive E. You need to 
configure Computer1 to start from VHDX. Hardware virtualization must not be available 
when Computer1 starts from VHDX. What should you run?
A. Add-Windows Image
B. bcdboot.exe
C. bcdedit.exe
D. bootcfg.exe
E. bootim.exe
F. bootsect.exe
G. diskpart.exe
H. Expand-Windows Image
31. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer that runs Win-
dows Server 2012 R2. You create a system image backup on the computer and then you 
upgrade to Windows Server 2016. You need to access a file from the backup. The solution 
must use the least amount of administrative effort. What should you do?
A. Add a drive from the Backup section of the Settings app.
B. Add a drive from the File History section of the Settings app.
C. Attach a VHD from the Computer Management console.
D. Restore the personal files from the File History Control Panel item.
32. You are the administrator for your company network. You are looking at the NTFS filesys-
tem. What are some of the advantages to using NTFS?
A. Compression
B. Encryption
C. Quotas
D. Security
E. All of the above
33. You are the administrator for your company network. You want to turn your FAT32 parti-
tion into an NTFS partition. What command-line utility should you use?
A. upgrade
B. convert
C. change part
D. Ntfsutil

32 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
34. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a virtual machine named 
VM1. VM1 uses a fixed size virtual hard disk (VHD) named Disk1.vhd . Disk1.vhd  is 
200 GB. You shut down VM1. What action should you use from the Edit Virtual Hard 
Disk Wizard if you need to reduce the size of Disk1.vhd ?
A. Merge
B. Compact
C. Shrink
D. Convert
35. You are the administrator for your company network. You create a new virtual disk in a 
storage pool by using the New Virtual Disk Wizard. You discover that the new virtual disk 
has a write-back cache of 1 GB. What should you do if you need to ensure that the virtual 
disk has a write-back cache of 5 GB?
A. Detach the virtual disk and then run the Resize-VirtualDisk  cmdlet.
B. Detach the virtual disk and then run the Set-VirtualDisk  cmdlet.
C. Delete the virtual disk and then run the New-StorageSubSystemVirtualDisk  cmdlet.
D. Delete the virtual disk and then run the New-VirtualDisk  cmdlet.
36. You are the administrator for your company network. You decide to purchase a new desk-
top computer that has four external USB hard drives. You want to create a single volume by 
using the four USB drives. You want the volume to be expandable, portable, and resilient in 
the event of failure of an individual USB hard drive. What should you do so you can create 
the required volume?
A. Create a new Storage Space across the four USB hard drives. Set the resiliency type to a 
three-way mirror.
B. Create a new spanned volume.
C. Create a new Storage Space across the four USB hard drives. Set the resiliency type to 
parity.
D. Create a new striped volume.
37. You are the administrator of your company network. The network contains three servers 
named ServerA, ServerB, and ServerC. All servers run Windows Server 2016. What should 
you do on ServerA so that it can provide iSCSI storage for the other two servers?
A. Start the Microsoft iSCSI Initiator Service and configure the iSCSI Initiator Properties.
B. Install the iSNS Server service feature and create a discovery domain.
C. Install the Multipath I/O (MPIO) feature and configure the MPIO Properties.
D. Install the iSCSI Target Server role service and configure iSCSI targets.
38. You are the administrator for your company network. You are trying to determine the 
default TCP port for RDP. Which one is it?
A. 21
B. 1433
C. 3260
D. 3389

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  33
39. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. Lisa is a member of both the Sales 
and R&D departments. There is a shared folder called Apps  that everyone uses. Here are 
the current permissions on the Apps  shared folder:
Group/User NTFS Shared
Sales Read Deny
Marketing Modify Full Control
R&D Read Read
HR Full Control Deny
Admin Full Control Change
What will Lisa’s local and remote permissions be when she logs into the Apps  folder?
A. Local = Read and Remote = Read
B. Local = Read and Remote = Deny
C. Local = Deny and Remote = Read
D. Local = Deny and Remote = Deny
40. You are the administrator for your company network. You are debating the benefits of the 
various filesystems available. Which filesystem was designed specifically with the issues of 
scalability and performance in mind?
A. FAT
B. exFAT
C. NTFS
D. ReFS
41. You are the administrator for your company network. You are debating the benefits of the 
NTFS filesystem. You are thinking about establishing disk quotas. By default, Windows 
Server 2016 supports disk quota restrictions. At which level is the default?
A. Folder level
B. Drive level
C. Volume level
D. Partition level
42. You are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing the benefits of 
using the NTFS filesystem with a colleague. One of the benefits allows you to move infre-
quently used files to external hard drives. What benefit are you discussing?
A. Mounted drives
B. Self-healing NTFS
C. Dynamic volumes
D. Remote storage

34 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
43. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing Active 
Directory. You remember that the NTFS filesystem is required. But you also know that a 
mandatory number of partition(s) are needed to run Active Directory. How many partitions 
are required to run Active Directory?
A. One
B. Two
C. Three
D. Four
44. You are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
disk configurations. Microsoft Windows Server 2016 supports two types of disk configura-
tions. What are they? (Choose two.)
A. Basic
B. Primary
C. Dynamic
D. Effective
45. You are the administrator for your company network. Your network contains an Active 
Directory domain that contains two Windows Server 2016 servers named Server1 and 
Server2. Each server has an operating system disk and four data disks. All of the disks are 
locally attached SATA disks. Each disk is a basic disk, is initialized as a MBR disk, and 
has a single NTFS volume. You plan to implement Redundant Array of Independent Disks 
(RAID) by using the data disks on Server1 and Server2. What should you do if you need to 
prepare the data disks for the implementation?
A. Initialize the data disks as GPT disks and create a ReFS volume on each disk.
B. Format the volumes on the data disks as exFAT.
C. Delete the volumes from the data disks.
D. Convert the data disks to dynamic disks.
46. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing managing 
volumes with a colleague. When talking about volume sets, you are discussing a volume set 
that is a simple volume that spans multiple disks. What type of volume are you discussing?
A. Simple volume
B. Spanned volume
C. Striped volume
D. Mirrored volume
E. RAID-5 volume

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  35
47. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing manag-
ing volumes with a colleague. When talking about volume sets, you are discussing a volume 
set that duplicates data across two disks. What type of volume are you discussing?
A. Simple volume
B. Spanned volume
C. Striped volume
D. Mirrored volume
E. RAID-5 volume
48. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing manag-
ing volumes with a colleague. When talking about volume sets, you are discussing a volume 
set that stores data in stripes across three or more disks. What type of volume are you 
discussing?
A. Simple volume
B. Spanned volume
C. Striped volume
D. Mirrored volume
E. RAID-5 volume
49. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing Redun-
dant Array of Independent Disks (RAID) with a colleague. Microsoft Windows Server 2016 
supports three types of RAID. What are they? (Choose three.)
A. RAID-0
B. RAID-1
C. RAID-2
D. RAID-3
E. RAID-4
F. RAID-5
50. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing Redun-
dant Array of Independent Disks (RAID) with a colleague. Of the three types of RAID sup-
ported by Windows Server 2016, one is not fault tolerant. Which one is it?
A. RAID-0
B. RAID-1
C. RAID-2
D. RAID-3
E. RAID-4
F. RAID-5

36 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
51. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing Redun-
dant Array of Independent Disks (RAID) with a colleague. You are discussing the minimum 
number of disks needed to set up a RAID-1 (Disk Mirroring) volume set. What is the mini-
mum number of disks needed?
A. 1
B. 2
C. 3
D. 4
52. You are the network administrator for your company network. With the ever-increasing 
demands of storage,  are used to surpass the limitation of 26 drive 
letters and to join two volumes into a folder on a separate physical disk drive. What is being 
discussed? (Fill in the blank.)
A. Data points
B. Dive points
C. Mount points
D. Volume points
53. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing Micro-
soft Multipath I/O (MPIO) with a colleague. Of all the supported load balancing policies 
that Windows Server 2016 supports, which one provides no load balancing?
A. Failover
B. Failback
C. Round robin
D. Round robin with a subset of paths
E. Dynamic least queue depth
F. Weighted path
54. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing Micro-
soft Multipath I/O (MPIO) with a colleague. Of all the supported load balancing policies 
that Windows Server 2016 supports, which one provides that all available paths will be 
active and will be used to distribute I/O in a balanced fashion?
A. Failover
B. Failback
C. Round robin
D. Round robin with a subset of paths
E. Dynamic least queue depth
F. Weighted path

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  37
55. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing Micro-
soft Multipath I/O (MPIO) with a colleague. Of all the supported load balancing policies 
that Windows Server 2016 supports, which one provides a configuration in which the I/O 
will route to the path with the least number of outstanding requests?
A. Failover
B. Failback
C. Round robin
D. Round robin with a subset of paths
E. Dynamic least queue depth
F. Weighted path
56. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing 
, which was developed to allow block-level access to a storage device over a 
network. What are you discussing? (Fill in the blank.)
A. Internet Small Computer System Interface (iSCSI)
B. Network Attached Storage (NAS)
C. Common Internet File System (CIFS)
D. Network File System (NFS)
57. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing with a 
colleague concepts of a storage solution that is a low-cost device for storing data and serv-
ing files through the use of an Ethernet LAN connection. What are you discussing?
A. Fibre Channel
B. Network Attached Storage (NAS)
C. Virtual Disk Service (VDS)
D. Data Center Bridging (DCB)
58. You are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
Virtual Disk Service (VDS). Windows Server 2016 uses VDS, which was created to ease 
the administration involved in managing various types of storage devices. Windows Server 
2016 supports which of the following storage management applications that use VDS? 
(Choose three.)
A. Disk Management snap-in
B. Partition Management snap-in
C. Diskpart
D. DiskRAID

38 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
59. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. You are using the Diskpart 
command-line utility. You want to use the switch that will allow you to reduce the physical 
size of the file. What switch command do you use?
A. Diskpart /assign
B. Diskpart /compact
C. Diskpart /convert
D. Diskpart /reduce
60. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing Data 
Center Bridging (DCB). DCB can be installed using Server Manager or using PowerShell. 
You have opted for using PowerShell. What command must you run to install DCB?
A. Install-WindowsFeature -name data-center-bridging
B. Install-WindowsFeature -name dcb
C. Install-WindowsFeature -name data center bridging
D. Install-WindowsFeature -name DCB
61. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are working with Windows 
PowerShell and Server Message Block (SMB), which is a network-sharing protocol that 
allows Windows machines that are running applications to read and write data to files. 
What PowerShell command would you use if you wanted to retrieve the connections estab-
lished from the SMB client to the SMB servers?
A. Get-SmbDelegation
B. Get-SmbServerConfiguration
C. Get-SmbSharedAccess
D. Get-SmbConnection
62. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are working with Windows 
PowerShell and Server Message Block (SMB), which is a network-sharing protocol that 
allows Windows machines that are running applications to read and write data to files. 
What PowerShell command would you use if you wanted to modify the properties of the 
SMB share?
A. Set-SmbClientConfiguration
B. Set-SmbShare
C. Set-SmbServerConfiguration
D. Set-SmbShareAccess
63. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
Server Message Block (SMB). SMB is a network-sharing protocol that allows Windows 
machines (either client- or server-based operating systems) that are running applications to 
read and write data to files. It also allows systems to request services or resources that are 
running on remote servers. What is one advantage to using SMB?
A. SMB allows for the use of any network protocol, running on top of the protocol being 
used.
B. SMB allows for the use of any network protocol, running underneath the protocol 
being used.

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  39
C. S MB does not allow for the use of any network protocol, running on top of the proto-
col being used.
D. SMB does not allow for the use of any network protocol, running underneath the pro-
tocol being used.
64. You are the administrator for your company network. An employee leaves unexpectedly 
and has encrypted files using EFS. There are two ways for you to unencrypt the files. What 
are two ways that an administrator can unencrypt the files? (Choose two.)
A. Log in using the user’s account and unencrypt the files.
B. Become a recovery agent and manually unencrypt the files.
C. Become a restore agent and manually unencrypt the files.
D. Log in as the administrator and unencrypt the files.
65. You are the administrator for your company network. You have decided to take advantage 
of the security provided by the NTFS filesystem. The default security permissions for Users 
is  on new folders and shares. (Fill in the blank.)
A. Read
B. Write
C. Full Control
D. Change
66. You are the administrator for your company network. Matt is a member of both the Sales 
and R&D departments. There is a shared folder called Apps  that everyone uses. Here are 
the current permissions on the Apps  shared folder:
Group/User NTFS Shared
Sales Full Control Read
Marketing Modify Full Control
R&D Modify Change
HR Full Control Deny
IT Full Control Read
Matt is trying to make changes to a document in the Apps  folder. He cannot make the 
changes necessary. What permission will need to change in order for him to make the nec-
essary changes?
A. Sales  folder shared permission needs to be changed to Change.
B. Sales  folder shared permission needs to be changed to Modify.
C. R&D folder NTFS permission needs to be changed to Change.
D. Nothing. The Sales  folder shared permission meets his requirements.

40 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
67. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. Matt is a member of the Sales, R&D, 
and HR departments. There is a folder called Apps  on the server. Here are the current per-
missions on the Apps  folder:
Group/User NTFS
Sales Read
Marketing Modify
R&D Modify
HR Full Control
IT Full Control
What is Matt’s effective NTFS permission?
A. Read
B. Modify
C. Full Control
D. Deny
68. You are the administrator for your company network. Lisa is a member of the Sales, R&D, 
and HR departments. There is a folder called Apps  on the server. Here are the current per-
missions on the Apps  folder:
Group/User NTFS
Sales Read
Marketing Modify
R&D Modify
HR Deny
IT Full Control
What is Lisa’s effective NTFS permission?
A. Read
B. Modify
C. Full Control
D. Deny

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  41
69. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have decided to take advantage 
of the security provided by shared permissions. The default shared permission for Adminis-
trators is  on new folders. (Fill in the blank).
A. Read
B. Write
C. Full Control
D. Change
70. You are the administrator for your company network. Company policy states that you must 
set up disk quotas to limit how much storage space a user can use on the hard drive. What 
filesystem must you use in order to take advantage of disk quotas?
A. FAT
B. FAT32
C. NTFS
D. exFAT
71. You are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing disk quotas with 
a colleague. You know that there are a few options available when setting up disk quotas. 
Which of the following types of quota is a predefined way to set up quotas?
A. Quotas by volume
B. Quotas by user
C. Specifying quota entries
D. Quota templates
72. You are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing storage options 
with a colleague. You are discussing a feature in Windows Server 2016 that gives admin-
istrators the ability to use both solid-state drives (SSDs) and conventional hard disk drives 
(HDDs) within the same storage pool. What type of storage is being discussed?
A. Tiered storage
B. Basic storage
C. Storage spaces direct
D. Local storage
73. You are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing the Boot Configu-
ration Data (BCD) store with a colleague. What utility do you use to edit the boot options 
in the BCD store?
A. bcdboot utility
B. bcdedit utility
C. bootcfg utility
D. bootsect utility

42 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
74. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing a 
way of finding and removing duplicate data within the company network without compro-
mising the integrity. What should you use?
A. Data chunking
B. Data redundancy
C. Data deduplication
D. Data replication
75. You are the administrator for your company network. You are thinking of enabling data 
deduplication. Where do you enable deduplication?
A. On files
B. On folders
C. On volumes
D. On partitions
76. You are the administrator for your company network. You have enabled data deduplica-
tion. Once you have enabled deduplication, the volume will contain which of the following? 
(Choose all that apply.)
A. Optimized files
B. Unoptimized files
C. Chunk store
D. Free space
77. You are the network administrator for your company network. You have a computer that 
runs Windows Server 2016 and is used by 10 users. The computer is joined to an Active 
Directory domain. All of the users are members of the Administrators group. Each user has 
an Active Directory account. You have a Microsoft Word document that contains confi-
dential information. What should you configure if you need to ensure that you are the only 
user who can open the document?
A. Account policies
B. NTFS permissions
C. Share permissions
D. Encrypting File System (EFS) settings
78. You are the administrator for your company network. You are trying to determine what the 
default TCP port for FTP is. Which one is it?
A. 21
B. 1433
C. 3260
D. 3389

Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions  43
79. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. Matt is a member of both the R&D 
and Marketing departments. There is a shared folder called Apps  that everyone uses. Here 
are the current permissions on the Apps  shared folder:
Group/User NTFS Shared
Sales Read Deny
Marketing Modify Full Control
R&D Read Read
HR Full Control Deny
Admin Full Control Change
What will Matt’s local and remote permissions be when he logs into the Apps  folder?
A. Local = Full Control and Remote = Deny
B. Local = Read and Remote = Deny
C. Local = Modify and Remote = Full Control
D. Local = Read and Remote = Change
80. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are discussing manag-
ing volumes with a colleague. When talking about volume sets, you are discussing a volume 
set that uses only one disk or a portion of a disk. What type of volume are you discussing?
A. Simple volume
B. Spanned volume
C. Striped volume
D. Mirrored volume
E. RAID-5 volume
81. You are the administrator of your company network. You are discussing Microsoft 
Multipath I/O (MPIO) with a colleague. Of all the supported load balancing policies that 
Windows Server 2016 supports, which one designates a preferred path that will handle 
all process requests until it fails, after which the standby path will become active until the 
primary reestablishes a connection and automatically regains control?
A. Failover
B. Failback
C. Round robin
D. Round robin with a subset of paths
E. Dynamic least queue depth
F. Weighted path

44 Chapter 2  ■ I mplement Storage Solutions
82. Y ou are the administrator of your company network. You are discussing the benefits of 
NTFS with a colleague. One of the benefits allows an administrator to map a local disk 
drive to an NTFS directory name. What is being discussed?
A. Dynamic volumes
B. Remote storage
C. Mounted drives
D. Disk quotas
83. You are the administrator of your company network. You want to see the logical and 
physical disks that are currently configured on your system. What tool should you use?
A. Disk Management
B. Device Manager
C. Task Manager
D. File Explorer
84. You are the administrator of your company network. You are discussing adding disk drives 
to a server partition. Once you have physically installed the disk drive, it must be initial-
ized. There are two different types of partition styles that are used to initialize disks. What 
are they? (Choose two.)
A. Master Boot Record (MBR)
B. Hard Disk Drive (HDD)
C. Solid State Drive (SSD)
D. GUID Partition Table (GPT)
85. You are the administrator of your company network. You are talking to a colleague about 
establishing a RAID-5 volume. What type of disk configuration should you use if you want 
to implement RAID?
A. Basic
B. Standard
C. Dynamic
D. Duplex

Implement Hyper-V
THe f ollow Ing MCSA wIndow S SerVer 
2016 exAM TopICS Are CoVered In THIS  
CHApTer:
✓ ✓3.1 I nstall and configure Hyper-V
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Determine 
hardware and compatibility requirements for installing 
Hyper-V; install Hyper-V; install management tools: upgrade 
from existing versions of Hyper-V; delegate virtual machine 
management; perform remote management of Hyper-V 
hosts; use Windows PowerShell Direct; implement nested 
virtualization
✓ ✓3.2 C onfigure virtual machine (VM) settings
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Add or 
remove memory in a running VM; configure dynamic  
memory; configure Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) 
support; configure smart paging; configure Resource  
Metering; manage Integration Services; create and configure  
Generation 1 and 2 VMs and determine appropriate usage 
scenarios; implement enhanced session mode; create Linux 
and FreeBSD VMs; install and configure Linux Integration 
Services (LIS); install and configure FreeBSD Integration 
Services (BIS); implement Secure Boot for Windows and 
Linux environments; move and convert VMs from previ -
ous versions of Hyper-V to Windows Server 2016 Hyper-V; 
export and import VMs; implement Discrete Device  
Assignment (DDA); troubleshoot VM configuration versions
✓ ✓3.3 C onfigure Hyper-V storage
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Create VHDs 
and VHDX files using Hyper-V Manager; create shared VHDX 
files; configure differencing disks; modify virtual hard disks; 
configure pass-through disks; resize a virtual hard disk; 
manage checkpoints; implement production checkpoints; 
implement a virtual Fibre Channel adapter; configure storage 
Quality of Service (QoS)Chapter 
3

✓ ✓3.4 Configure Hyper-V networking
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Add and 
remove virtual network interface cards (vNICs); configure 
Hyper-V virtual switches; optimize network performance; 
configure MAC addresses; configure network isolation; con -
figure synthetic and legacy virtual network adapter; configure 
NIC teaming in VMs; configure virtual machine queue (VMQ); 
enable Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) on network 
adapters bound to a Hyper-V virtual switch using Switch 
Embedded Teaming (SET); configure Bandwidth Management

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  47
1. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 has a dynamically expanding virtual hard disk (VHD) 
file that is 950 GB. The VHD currently contains about 450 GB of free space. What command/
cmdlet should you use if you want to reduce the amount of disk space used by the VHD?
A. Mount-VHD  cmdlet
B. DiskPart  command
C. Set-VHD  cmdlet
D. Optimize-VHD  cmdlet
2. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 contains a virtual machine named VM1. What should 
you run on Server1 if you need to make sure that you can use nested virtualization on VM1?
A. Mount-VHD  cmdlet
B. DiskPart  command
C. Set-VMProcessor  cmdlet
D. Set-VM  cmdlet
3. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 contains two virtual machines named VM1 and 
VM2. You need to ensure that VM1 and VM2 can communicate with each other only. 
What cmdlet should you use to prevent VM1 and VM2 from communicating with Server1?
A. Set-NetNeighbor
B. Remove-VMSwitchTeamMember
C. Set-VMSwitch
D. Enable-VMSwitchExtension
4. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 contains a virtual machine named VM1. You want 
to deploy several shielded virtual machines on VM1. You deploy a Host Guardian on a 
new server. What should you run if you want to view the process of the shielded virtual 
machines installation?
A. Get-ShieldedVMProvisioningStatus  cmdlet
B. Diskpart  command
C. Set-VHD  cmdlet
D. Set-VM  cmdlet
5. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. The host contains a virtual machine named VM1. VM1 has 
resource metering enabled. What cmdlet should you run if you need to use resource meter-
ing to track the amount of network traffic that VM1 sends to the 10.10.16.0/20 network?
A. Add-VMNetworkAdapter
B. Set-VMNetworkAdapter
C. New-VMResourcePool
D. Set-VMNetworkAdapterRoutingDomainMapping

48 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
6. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1, which has the Hyper-V Server role installed. You want to create a 
virtual machine named VM1 on Server1. You need to make sure that you can start VM1 
from the network. What are two possible ways to do this? (Choose two.)
A. Create a Generation 2 virtual machine.
B. Create a Generation 1 virtual machine and run the Enable-NetAdapterPackageDirect  
cmdlet.
C. Create a Generation 1 virtual machine that has a legacy network adapter.
D. Create a Generation 1 virtual machine and configure a Single Root I/O Virtualization 
(SR-IOV) interface for the network adapter.
7. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 contains a virtual machine named VM1. What 
should you run on Server1 if you need to ensure that you can use nested virtualization on 
VM1?
A. Mount-VHD  cmdlet
B. Diskpart  command
C. Set-VHD  cmdlet
D. Set-VM  cmdlet
E. Set-VMHost  cmdlet
F. Set-VMProcessor  cmdlet
G. Install-WindowsFeature  cmdlet
H. Optimize-VHD  cmdlet
8. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. You plan to deploy several shielded virtual machines on 
Server1 and deploy a Host Guardian on the server. What should you run first if you need to 
ensure that Server1 can host shielded virtual machines?
A. Mount-VHD  cmdlet
B. Diskpart  command
C. Set-VHD  cmdlet
D. Set-VM  cmdlet
E. Set-VMHost  cmdlet
F. Set-VMProcessor  cmdlet
G. Install-WindowsFeature  cmdlet
H. Optimize-VHD  cmdlet

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  49
9. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 has a virtual machine that uses a VHD named 
Disk1.vhdx . You receive a warning message from Event Viewer stating that “One or more 
virtual hard disks have a physical sector size that is smaller than the physical sector size of 
the storage on which the virtual hard disk file is located.” What should you run if you need 
to resolve the problem that causes the warning message?
A. Mount-VHD  cmdlet
B. Diskpart  command
C. Set-VHD  cmdlet
D. Set-VM  cmdlet
E. Set-VMHost  cmdlet
F. Set-VMProcessor  cmdlet
G. Install-WindowsFeature  cmdlet
H. Optimize-VHD  cmdlet
10. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 has a virtual machine named VM1 that uses a single 
VHDX file. VM1 is configured as shown in the following table.
Configuration Details
Virtual Machine Generation V2
Operating System Windows 8
Filesystem NTFS
Number of Partitions 1
Disk Type Basic
Unallocated Disk Space 100 GB
You plan to use VM1 as a virtual machine template to deploy shielded virtual machines. 
What should you run if you need to ensure that VM1 can be used to deploy shielded virtual 
machines?
A. Mount-VHD  cmdlet
B. Diskpart  command
C. Set-VHD  cmdlet
D. Set-VM  cmdlet
E. Set-VMHost  cmdlet
F. Set-VMProcessor  cmdlet
G. Install-WindowsFeature  cmdlet
H. Optimize-VHD  cmdlet

50 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
11. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. Your network contains an Active Direc -
tory forest. You install Windows Server 2016 on 10 virtual machines. You need to deploy the 
Web Server (IIS) server role identically to the virtual machines. What should you do?
A. Use PowerShell Desired State Configuration (DSC) to create a default configuration 
and then apply the configuration to the virtual machines.
B. Create a software installation package and then publish the package to the virtual 
machines by using a Group Policy Object (GPO).
C. From a Group Policy Object (GPO), create an application control policy and then apply 
the policy to the virtual machines.
D. From Windows System Image Manager, create an answer file, copy the file to  
C: \ Sysprep  on each virtual machine, and then run the Apply-Image  cmdlet.
12. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 contains four virtual machines. VM1 is a shielded 
virtual machine that runs Windows Server 2012 R2. VM2 is a shielded virtual machine 
that runs Windows Server 2016. VM3 is a virtual machine that runs Windows Server 2012 
R2 and has Secure Boot enabled. VM4 is a virtual machine that runs Windows Server 2016 
and has all of its drives protected by using BitLocker Drive Encryption (BitLocker). Using 
the Virtual Machine Connection tool from Hyper-V Manager, what machine or machines 
can you connect to?
A. VM1, VM2, VM3, and VM4
B. VM4 only
C. VM1 and VM2 only
D. VM3 and VM4 only
E. VM2 only
13. You are the administrator for your company network. You have decided to delete a virtual 
machine using Hyper-V Manager. What else must you do?
A. The only way you can do this is by using PowerShell.
B. Manually delete any virtual disks that were part of the virtual machine to free up disk 
space after the virtual machine has been deleted using Hyper-V Manager.
C. You must first delete the virtual machine’s files on the hard drive before deleting the 
virtual machine using Hyper-V Manager.
D. Nothing; everything will be deleted when you use Hyper-V Manager.
14. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on deploying vir-
tual machines. Which of the following statements is true regarding virtual machines?
A. Virtual machines each run in their own child partitions. Child partitions have direct 
access to hardware resources.
B. Virtual machines each run in their own child partitions. Child partitions do not have 
direct access to hardware resources.
C. Virtual machines run in another server’s child partitions. Child partitions have direct 
access to hardware resources.
D. Virtual machines run in another server’s child partitions. Child partitions do not have 
direct access to hardware resources.

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  51
15. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. You are looking at the 
different types of hard disks available with Hyper-V. One type of disk starts with a small 
VHD file and expands it on demand once an installation takes place. What type of hard 
disk is being described?
A. Dynamically expanding
B. Fixed size
C. Differencing
D. Physical (or pass-through) disk
16. You are the network administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 
2016 Hyper-V host named Server1 and a two-node scale-out file server cluster named Clus-
ter1. A virtual machine named VM1 runs on Server1. What tool should you use if you need 
to migrate the storage on VM1 to Cluster1?
A. The clussvc.exe  command
B. The cluster.exe  command
C. The Computer Management console
D. The configurehyperv.exe  command
E. The Disk Management console
F. The Failover Cluster Manager console
G. The Hyper-V Manager console
H. Server Manager
17. You are the network administrator for your company network. You have three Windows 
Server 2016 servers named Server1, Server2, and Server3. Server1 and Server2 have the 
Hyper-V server role installed. Server3 has the iSCSI Target Server role installed. What tool 
should you use first if you need to create a Hyper-V cluster?
A. The clussvc.exe  command
B. The cluster.exe  command
C. The Computer Management console
D. The configurehyperv.exe  command
E. The Disk Management console
F. The Failover Cluster Manager console
G. The Hyper-V Manager console
H. Server Manager

52 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
18. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning the configuration of a 
virtual network switch for your Hyper-V network. It will contain the following Hyper-V hosts. 
Server1 will have 10 virtual machines that must be able to communicate with each other. The 
virtual machines must be prevented from communicating with Server1 and all other servers on 
the corporate network. The Hyper-V network will also have a two-node failover cluster named 
Cluster1 that will have 20 virtual machines. The virtual machines will run on both nodes. 
Hyper-V hosts on the corporate network must be able to connect to the virtual machines. 
What type of virtual switch should you select for the 10 virtual machines on Server1?
A. External
B. Internal
C. Private
D. Public
19. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning the configuration of a 
virtual network switch for your Hyper-V network. It will contain the following Hyper-V hosts. 
Server1 will have 10 virtual machines that must be able to communicate with each other. The 
virtual machines must be prevented from communicating with Server1 and all other servers on 
the corporate network. The Hyper-V network will also have a two-node failover cluster named 
Cluster1 that will have 20 virtual machines. The virtual machines will run on both nodes. 
Hyper-V hosts on the corporate network must be able to connect to the virtual machines. 
What type of virtual switch should you select for the 20 virtual machines on Cluster1?
A. External
B. Internal
C. Private
D. Public
20. You are the administrator for your company network. You have an application named 
App1. App1 is distributed to multiple Hyper-V virtual machines in a multitenant environ-
ment. What should you include in the environment if you need to ensure that the traffic is 
distributed evenly among the virtual machines that host App1?
A. A network controller and Windows Server Network Load Balancing (NLB) nodes
B. A network controller and Windows Server Software Load Balancing (SLB) nodes
C. A RAS Gateway and Windows Server Network Load Balancing (NLB) nodes
D. A RAS Gateway and Windows Server Software Load Balancing (SLB) nodes
21. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. What counter should you use from Performance Monitor if 
you need to identify the amount of processor resources consumed by Hyper-V and virtual 
machines?
A. \Hyper-V Hypervisor\Logical Processors
B. \Hyper-V Hypervisor Virtual Processor(_Total)\% Hypervisor Run Time
C. \Hyper-V Hypervisor Logical Processor(_Total)\% Total Run Time
D. \Hyper-V Hypervisor Root Virtual Processor(_Total)\% Guest Run Time

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  53
22. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. Server1 also has the Hyper-V role installed. Virtual machines on 
Server1 are connected to an external switch named Switch1. You create a virtual machine 
named VM1 on Server1 by running the following cmdlets:
Add-VM VM1
Add-VMHardDiskDrive –VMName VM1 –ControllerType IDE –Path C:\VMs\Disk1.
vhd
Add-VMNetworkAdapter –VMName VM1
What should you do if you need to ensure that you can install the operating system on VM1 
by using Windows Deployment Services?
A. Add a SCSI controller to VM1.
B. Modify the DefaultFlowMinimumBandwidthWeight  parameter of Switch1.
C. Modify the SwitchType  parameter of Switch1.
D. Add a legacy network adapter to VM1.
23. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a four-node Hyper-V clus-
ter named Cluster1. A virtual machine named VM1 runs on Cluster1. VM1 has a network 
adapter that connects to a virtual machine named Network1. What command should you 
run if you need to prevent a network disconnection on VM1 from causing VM1 to move to 
another cluster node?
A. Remove-ClusterVMMonitoredItem –VirtualMachine VM1
B. Set-VM –VMName VM1
C. Set-VMNetworkAdapter –VMName VM1
D. Set-VMSwitch –Name Network1
24. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 hosts a virtual machine named VM1. You install 
the Hyper-V server role on VM1. What should you do if you need to ensure that the 
virtual machines hosted on VM1 can communicate with the virtual machines hosted on 
Server1?
A. Run the Set-VMNetworkAdapterIsolation  cmdlet and specify the  
MultiTenantStack Off  parameter on Server1.
B. Run the Set-VMNetworkAdapter  cmdlet and specify the MacAddressSpoofing Off  
parameter on VM1.
C. Run the Set-VMNetworkAdapterIsolation  cmdlet and specify the  
MultiTenant Stack On  parameter on VM1.
D. Run the Set-VMNetworkAdapter  cmdlet and specify the MacAddressSpoofing On  
parameter on Server1.

54 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
25. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have two Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V hosts named Server1 and Server2. Server1 and Server2 are connected on the same 
network. You create an external network switch named Switch1 on Server1 and Server2. 
You have the virtual machines shown in the following table.
Virtual Machine Name IP Address Subnet Mask Hyper-V Host
VM1 192.168.1.16 255.255.255.0 Server1
VM2 192.168.1.32 255.255.255.0 Server2
VM3 192.168.1.48 255.255.255.0 Server2
All three virtual machines are connected to Switch1. You need to prevent applications in 
VM3 from being able to capture network traffic from VM1 or VM2. What should you do 
to ensure that VM1 retains network connectivity?
A. Configure network virtualization for VM1 and VM2.
B. Modify the subnet mask of VM1 and VM2.
C. Configure the VLAN ID setting of Switch1 on Server2.
D. Create an external switch and connect VM3 to the switch on Server2.
26. You are the administrator for your company network. Your network contains an Active 
Directory domain. The domain contains a Windows Server 2016 Hyper-V host named 
Server1. Server1 hosts four machines that are members of the domain. The virtual machines 
are configured as shown:
Virtual Machine 
NameOperating System Virtual Machine 
GenerationType of VHD File
VM1 Windows 10 2 VHD
VM2 Windows Server 
20162 VHD
VM3 Windows Server 
2012 R22 VHDX
VM4 Windows Server 
20161 VHDX
What virtual machines can you manage by using PowerShell Direct?
A. Only VM2
B. VM1, VM2, and VM4
C. Only VM4
D. VM1, VM2, and VM3

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  55
27. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You need to implement network vir-
tualization. On what item should you configure the Virtual Subnet ID?
A. Virtual switch
B. Hyper-V Server
C. Virtual machine
D. Virtual network adapter
28. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
virtual machine named VM1. VM1 hosts a service that requires high network throughput. 
VM1 has a virtual network adapter that connects to a Hyper-V switch named Switch1, 
which has one network adapter. The network adapter supports Remote Direct Memory 
Access (RDMA), the Single Root I/O Virtualization (SR-IOV) interface, Quality of Service 
(QoS), and Receive Side Scaling (RSS). You need to ensure that the traffic from VM1 can be 
processed by multiple networking processors. What PowerShell command should you run 
on the host of VM1?
A. Set-NetAdapterRss
B. Set-NetAdapterRdma
C. Set-NetAdapterQos
D. Set-NetAdapterSriov
29. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. The network contains one Active 
Directory domain. The domain contains two Windows Server 2016 Hyper-V hosts named 
Host1 and Host2. Host1 contains a virtual machine named VM1. You plan to move VM1 
to Host2. What cmdlet should you use if you need to generate a report that lists any con-
figuration issues on Host2 that will prevent VM1 from being moved successfully?
A. Move-VM
B. Test-VHD
C. Debug-VM
D. Compare-VM
30. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Host1. You configure Host1 as a virtualization host and create 20 new vir-
tual machines on Host1. You need to ensure that all of the virtual machines can connect to 
the Internet through Host1. What three actions should you perform? (Choose three.)
A. Install the Remote Access server role on a virtual machine.
B. Enable virtual LAN identification from the properties of each virtual machine.
C. Connect to the virtual machine switch from the properties of each virtual machine.
D. Configure the network address translation (NAT) network on Host1.
E. Create an internal virtual machine switch and specify an IP address for the switch on 
Host1.

56 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
31. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. The network adapters on Server1 have Single Root I/O 
Virtualization (SR-IOV) enabled. Server1 hosts a Windows Server 2016 virtual machine 
named VM1. What should you do if you need to identify whether SR-IOV is used by 
VM1?
A. Open Hyper-V Manager and view the Integration Services settings of VM1 on Server1.
B. Open Device Manager and view the properties of the network adapters.
C. Sign in to VM1. View the properties of the network connections.
D. Open Hyper-V Manager and view the properties of the network adapters.
32. You are the administrator for your company network. You want to capture the state, data, 
and hardware configuration of a running virtual machine. What checkpoint can be useful 
if you need to recreate a specific state or condition of a running virtual machine so that you 
can troubleshoot a problem?
A. Production
B. Standard
C. Fabrication
D. Customary
33. You are the administrator for your company network. You know that Virtual Network 
Manager offers three types of virtual networks that you can use to define various network-
ing topologies for virtual machines and the virtualization server. Which type of virtual net-
work is isolated from all external network traffic on the virtualization server, as well as any 
network traffic between the management operating system and the external network?
A. Private virtual network
B. Internal virtual network
C. Public virtual network
D. External virtual network
34. You are the administrator for your company network. Your company has a Windows Server 
2016 Hyper-V environment configured as shown:
Hyper-V Host Name Configuration Virtual Switch Name
Host1 Uses an Intel processor
Is a member of a SAN named 
SAN1Switch1
Host2 Uses an AMD processor
Has local storage onlySwitch2

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  57
Hyper-V Host Name Configuration Virtual Switch Name
Host3 Uses an Intel processor
Is a member of a SAN named 
SAN1Switch1
Host4 Uses an Intel processor
Has local storage onlySwitch2
All of the virtual switches are the external type. What should you do if you need to ensure 
that you can move virtual machines between the hosts without causing the virtual machines 
to disconnect from the network?
A. Implement a Hyper-V replica between Host2 and Host4.
B. Implement Live Migration by using Host3 and Host4.
C. Implement Live Migration by using Host1 and Host2.
D. Implement Live Migration by using Host1 and Host3.
35. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. Server1 is a Hyper-V host that hosts a virtual machine named VM1. 
Server1 has three network adapter cards that are connected to virtual switches named 
vSwitch1, vSwitch2, and vSwitch3. You configure NIC Teaming on VM1. The team name 
is VM1 NIC Team. Added to the team are Ethernet2 (10 Gbps) and Ethernet3 (10 Gbps). 
The teaming mode is Switch Independent. What should you do if you need to ensure that 
VM1 will retain access to the network if a physical adapter card fails on Server1?
A. Run the Set-VMNetworkAdapterTeamMapping  cmdlet using PowerShell on VM1.
B. Modify the settings on VM1 from Hyper-V Manager on Server1.
C. Run the Set-VMNetworkAdapterFailoverConfiguration  cmdlet from PowerShell on 
Server1.
D. Add the adapter named Ethernet to the NIC Team from the properties of the NIC 
Team on VM1.
36. You are the administrator for your company network. You have two Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V hosts named Server1 and Server2. Server1 and Server2 are connected to the same 
network. You create an external network switch named Switch1 on Server1 and Server2. 
You have the virtual machines shown in the following table:
Virtual Machine 
NameIP Address Subnet Mask Hyper-V Host
VM1 192.168.1.16 255.255.255.0 Server1
VM2 192.168.1.32 255.255.255.0 Server2
VM3 192.168.1.48 255.255.255.0 Server2

58 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
All three virtual machines are connected to Switch1. On VM3, you need to prevent appli-
cations from being able to capture network traffic from VM1 or VM2. The solution must 
ensure that VM1 retains network connectivity. What should you do?
A. Configure the VLAN ID setting of Switch1 on Server2.
B. Create an external switch and connect VM3 to the switch on Server2.
C. Modify the subnet mask of VM1 and VM2.
D. Configure network virtualization for VM1 and VM2.
37. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 has a virtual disk file named Disk1.vhdx  that  
contains an installation to Windows Server 2016. You create a virtual disk file named 
Disk2.vhdx  that is configured as shown:
PS c:\ Get-VHD Path C:\folder1\Disk2.vhdx
ComputerName  :  SERVER1
Path :  c:\folder1\disk2.vhdx
VHDFormat  :  VHDX
What command should you run if you want to move Disk1.vhdx  to a new folder called  
C: \ Folder2  and be able to use Disk2.vhdx  only after you run this command?
A. Merge-VHD
B. Optimize-VHD
C. Optimize-VHDSet
D. Set-VHD
E. Test-VHD
38. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 has a virtual disk file named Disk1.vhdx  that  
contains an installation to Windows Server 2016. You create a virtual disk file named  
Disk2.vhdx  that is configured as shown:
PS c:\ Get-VHD Path C:\folder1\Disk2.vhdx
ComputerName  :  SERVER1
Path :  c:\folder1\disk2.vhdx
VHDFormat  :  VHDX
What command should you run before you can copy the files directly into Disk2.vhdx ?
A. Merge-VHD
B. Optimize-VHD
C. Optimize-VHDSet
D. Set-VHD
E. Test-VHD

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  59
39. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are working on creating an 
internal virtual network. You know that communication between the virtual machine 
and the local host computer is not configured automatically. Once you install the virtual 
machine, you need to make sure that the TCP/IP settings are defined in the virtual network 
card. What is a way to check to see if your settings are working?
A. Run ping  from the host machine.
B. Run tracert  from the host machine.
C. Run ping  from the target machine.
D. Run tracert  from the target machine.
40. You are the administrator for your company network. You administer a Windows Server 
2016 server that runs Hyper-V. The computer hosts a virtual machine with multiple 
checkpoints. The virtual machine uses one virtual CPU and 512 MB of RAM. You 
discover that the virtual machine pauses automatically and displays the state as Paused-
Critical. What component should you use if you need to identify the component that is 
causing the error?
A. There is no virtual switch defined.
B. There is insufficient memory.
C. There is insufficient hard disk space.
D. There are an insufficient number of virtual processors.
41. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
computer named Server1 that has the Hyper-V feature installed. Server1 hosts a virtual 
machine named VM1. VM1 runs Windows Server 2016. VM1 connects to a private virtual 
network switch. What should you do from Server1 if you need to remotely execute Power-
Shell cmdlets on VM1?
A. Run the winrm.exe  command and specify the -s parameter.
B. Run the Powershell.exe  command and specify the -Command  parameter.
C. Run the Receive-PSSession  cmdlet and specify the -Name  parameter.
D. Run the Invoke-Command  cmdlet and specify the -VMName  parameter.
42. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer that runs 
Windows Server 2012. You create a system image backup on the computer and then you 
upgrade to Windows Server 2016. You need to access a file from the backup. What should 
you do if you want to complete this task using the least amount of administrative effort?
A. Add a drive from the Backup section of the Settings app.
B. Add a drive from the File History section of the Settings app.
C. Attach a VHD from the Computer Management console.
D. Restore the personal files from the File History Control Panel item.

60 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
43. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have to set up a new wireless 
network for one of your clients. What should you do if the client wants to ensure that only 
certain designated wireless laptops can connect to the new network to prevent misuse?
A. Use Media Access Control (MAC) address control.
B. Use IPv4 address control.
C. Use Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP).
D. Use Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA).
44. You are the administrator for your company network. You are talking to a colleague regard -
ing the Hyper-V hypervisor. What statement about the Hyper-V hypervisor is correct?
A. The hypervisor runs in the parent partition and makes sure that the operating system 
can host guest operating systems.
B. The hypervisor runs in the child partition and makes sure that the operating system 
can host guest operating systems.
C. The hypervisor runs directly on the hardware and makes sure that guest operating sys-
tems can be virtualized.
D. The hypervisor runs below the hardware and makes sure that guest operating systems 
can be virtualized.
45. You are the administrator for your company network. You deploy a Hyper-V server in an 
isolated test environment, which is prevented from accessing the Internet. The new server 
runs the Datacenter edition of Windows Server 2016. You plan to deploy the following 
guest virtual machines on the server.
Quantity Operating System Domain Member
10 Windows Server 2012 R2 Yes
4 Windows Server 2016 No
5 Windows Server 2016 Yes
For the virtual machines, what activation model should you use?
A. Multiple Activation Key (MAK)
B. Automatic Virtual Machine Activation (AVMA)
C. Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) key
D. Key Management Service (KMS)
46. You are the network administrator for your company network. You are looking at the dif-
ferent types of hard disks available with Hyper-V. For one type of hard disk, the size of the 
VHD file is fixed to the size specified when the disk is created. What type of hard disk is 
being described?
A. Dynamically expanding
B. Fixed size
C. Differencing
D. Physical (or pass-through) disk

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  61
47. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a computer named Com-
puter1 that has the Hyper-V feature enabled. You have two virtual machines named VM1 
and VM2 hosted on Computer1. VM1 can communicate with VM2 and Computer1. VM1 
fails to connect to the Internet; however, Computer1 can still connect to the Internet. What 
should you do if you need to ensure that VM1 can connect to the Internet?
A. On Computer1, modify the network settings.
B. Enable port mirroring on VM1.
C. Create an external virtual switch and configure VM1 to use the switch.
D. On VM1, select Enable Virtual LAN Identification.
48. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host that contains a virtual machine named VM1 that has Resource Metering 
enabled. What cmdlet should you run if you need to use Resource Metering to track the 
amount of network traffic that VM1 sends to the 10.0.0.0/8 network?
A. Add-VMNetworkAdapter
B. Set-VMNetworkAdapter
C. New-VMResourcePool
D. Set-VMNetworkAdapterRoutingDomainMapping
49. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. What statement is true when you use 
Hyper-V Manager to delete a virtual machine?
A. You will delete the virtual machine configuration file and all related virtual disks.
B. You will delete the virtual machine configuration file and the primary virtual disk.
C. You will delete only the virtual machine configuration file.
D. The virtual machine will only be removed from the Hyper-V Manager; the virtual 
machine configuration file will still exist in the filesystem.
50. You are the administrator for your company network. What are the minimum CPU require-
ments in order to run Hyper-V on a machine? (Choose all that apply.)
A. Hardware Data Execution Prevention (DEP), specifically Intel XD bit (execute disable 
bit) or AMD NX bit (no execute bit), must be available and enabled.
B. An x64-compatible processor with Intel VT or AMD-V technology must be enabled.
C. Hardware Data Execution Protection (DEP) must be disabled.
D. You must have a minimum of 1.4 GHz.
51. You are the administrator for your company network. How do you move one virtual 
machine from one Hyper-V server to another machine?
A. You move the virtual machine configuration file and all related files like virtual disks 
to the other machine and use the Import function on the target machine.
B. You use the Export function in Hyper-V Manager, then make the export path available 
on the target machine and use Import on the target machine.
C. You use the Export function in Hyper-V Manager, then make the export path available 
on the target machine and use Open Virtual Machine on the target machine.
D. You move the virtual machine configuration file and all related files like virtual disks 
to the other machine and use Open Virtual Machine on the target machine.

62 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
52. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You plan to utilize Hyper-V. Hyper-
V allows your organization to do which of the following?
A. Hyper-V gives a small company the ability to run a single server on multiple boxes and 
compete with a company of any size.
B. Hyper-V gives a small company the ability to run multiple servers on a single box and 
compete with a company of any size.
C. Hyper-V gives a small company the ability to run a single server on a single box and 
compete with a company of any size.
D. Hyper-V gives a small company the ability to run multiple servers on multiple boxes 
and compete with a company of any size.
53. You are the administrator for your company network. You are looking at the benefits of 
using Hyper-V. Different forms of virtualization are available. Name the type of virtualiza-
tion being described here: applications run on a different computer, and only the screen 
information is transferred to your computer.
A. Server virtualization
B. Presentation virtualization
C. Desktop virtualization
D. Application virtualization
54. You are the administrator for your company network. You are looking at the benefits of 
using Hyper-V. Different forms of virtualization are available. Name the type of virtualiza-
tion being described here: enables multiple servers to run on the same physical server and is 
a tool that allows you to move physical machines to virtual machines and manage them on 
a few physical servers.
A. Server virtualization
B. Presentation virtualization
C. Desktop virtualization
D. Application virtualization
55. You are the administrator of your company network. You are planning on running Hyper-
V, but you are not sure what guest operating system versions (32- or 64-bit) it supports. 
What guest operating system versions can Hyper-V run?
A. 32-bit only
B. 64-bit only
C. 128-bit only
D. Both 32-bit and 64-bit

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  63
56. Y ou are the administrator of your company network. You are planning on running Hyper-
V Server. You know that Hyper-V allows for support for symmetric multiprocessors. What 
is the maximum number of processors that Hyper-V Server can use in a virtual machine 
environment?
A. 28
B. 36
C. 64
D. 128
57. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing 
Hyper-V, and one of its key features allows you to install virtual machines on a properly 
activated Windows Server 2016 system without the need to manage individual product keys 
for each virtual machine. What key feature is being described?
A. Automatic Virtual Machine Activation (AVMA)
B. Discrete Device Assignment (DDA)
C. Virtual Machine Queue (VMQ)
D. Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA)
58. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing 
Hyper-V. You understand that certain hardware requirements must be met. What is  
Microsoft’s recommended minimum amount of RAM needed to run Hyper-V?
A. 2 GB
B. 4 GB
C. 6 GB
D. 8 GB
59. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing 
Hyper-V. You understand that certain software requirements must be met. There are three 
editions of Windows Server that Hyper-V can run on. What are they? (Choose three.)
A. Windows Server 2016 Standard Edition
B. Windows Server 2016 Datacenter Edition
C. Windows Server 2016 Nano Server Edition
D. Microsoft Hyper-V Server 2012 R2 Edition
60. You are the administrator for your company network. You are managing your virtual net-
works using Virtual Switch Manager, which allows you to create, manage, and delete vir-
tual switches. Virtual Switch Manager allows you to define the type of network. Name the 
network type described here: this option allows virtual machines to communicate with each 
other and with the host system, but not with the physical network.
A. External
B. Private
C. Internal
D. Public

64 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
61. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You know that Hyper-V offers vari-
ous types of hard disks to use. Name the one described here: this type of disk is associated 
in a parent-child relationship with another disk.
A. Dynamically expanding
B. Fixed size
C. Differencing
D. Physical (pass-through)
62. You are the administrator for your company network. You know that Hyper-V offers vari-
ous types of hard disks to use. Name the one described here: this type provides the highest 
performance of all disk types and thus should be used for production servers where perfor-
mance is the top priority.
A. Dynamically expanding
B. Fixed size
C. Differencing
D. Physical (pass-through)
63. You are the administrator for your company network. You want to boot a Linux operating 
system with the Secure Boot option enabled in a virtual machine. What must you do if this 
will be the first time you boot the OS?
A. Set -BootOrder  to HardDiskDrive .
B. Configure the virtual machine to use the Microsoft UEFI Certificate Authority.
C. You can’t enable Secure Boot with Linux.
D. Set -EnableSecureBoot  without specifying a template.
64. You are the administrator for your company network. You are creating a Nano server 
image named Nano1.vhdx  by using the New-NanoServerImage  cmdlet. You attach 
Nano1.vhdx  to a Generation 1 virtual machine named Nano1. When you start Nano1, 
you get the following error message: “Boot failure. Reboot and select proper Boot device 
or Insert Boot Media in selected Boot device.” What should you do if you need to  
successfully start Nano server?
A. Attach Nano1.vhdx  to a SCSI controller.
B. Recreate Nano1 as a Generation 2 virtual machine.
C. Increase the memory of Nano1 to 512 MB.
D. Modify the BIOS settings of Nano1.
65. You are the administrator for your company network. You plan on using NIC Teaming 
when setting up your virtualization as a way to have load balancing with Hyper-V. What is 
the maximum number of network adapters that you can include in a NIC Team?
A. 16
B. 32
C. 64
D. 128

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  65
66. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You plan on using NIC Teaming. As 
an administrator, you can configure NIC Teaming in different configuration models. Those 
models include which of the following? (Choose all that apply.)
A. Switch Separated
B. Switch Subordinate
C. Switch Independent
D. Switch Dependent
67. You are the administrator for your company network. You plan on setting up Storage 
Quality of Service (QoS). You can use Storage QoS in Windows Server 2016 to accomplish 
which of the following? (Choose all that apply.)
A. Relieve problem neighbor issues.
B. Monitor end-to-end storage performance.
C. Manage Storage I/O per workload needs.
D. Allow the guest operating system to communicate with host devices.
68. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 hosts a virtual machine named VM1. VM1 is in a 
workgroup. VM1 is currently in a running state. You need to create 10 copies of VM1 on 
Server1 in the least amount of time possible. What cmdlets should you use?
A. Stop-VM  and then Import-VM
B. Export-VM  and then Import-VM
C. Checkpoint-VM  and then New-VM
D. Copy-VMFile  and then New-VM
69. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. Your network contains two Hyper-
V servers named Server1 and Server2. Server1 has Windows Server 2012 R2 installed and 
Server2 has Windows Server 2016 installed. You perform a live migration of a virtual 
machine named VM1 from Server1 to Server2. What three PowerShell cmdlets should you 
run if you need to create a production checkpoint for VM1 on Server2? (Choose three.)
A. Set-VM
B. Update-VMVersion
C. Checkpoint-VM
D. Set-VMHost
E. Stop-VM
70. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You would like to use PowerShell to 
configure features of the virtual network adapter in a virtual machine or the management 
operating system. What PowerShell cmdlet should you use?
A. Set-VMNetworkAdapter
B. New-VMNetworkAdapter
C. Get-VMNetworkAdapter
D. Add-VMNetworkAdapter

66 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
71. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on using Switch 
Embedded Teaming (SET). SET allows an administrator to combine a group of physical 
adapters into software-based virtual adapters. What is the maximum number of adapters 
that can be part of a SET?
A. 4
B. 8
C. 12
D. 16
72. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on using Switch 
Embedded Teaming (SET). Which of the following is true when setting up SET?
A. All network adapters that are members of the SET group can be different adapters.
B. All network adapters that are members of the SET group must be from different  
manufacturers.
C. There are no requirements when it comes to the adapter types.
D. All network adapters that are members of the SET group must be identical adapters.
73. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. You have two network adapter cards on Server1 that are 
Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA)-capable. You need to combine the bandwidth  
of the network adapter cards for a virtual machine on Server1. You must ensure that the 
virtual machine can use the RDMA capabilities of the network adapter cards. What  
PowerShell command should you run first?
A. Add-NetLbfoTeamNic
B. Add-VMNetworkAdapter
C. New-NetLbfoTeam
D. New-VMSwitch
74. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Hyper-V server that is 
running a Generation 1 Windows Server 2016 virtual machine. You need to add another 
hard drive to the virtual machine. The Hyper-V server has 1 TB of available free space for 
another hard drive. When you try to add the hard drive to the virtual machine, the options 
are grayed out. What do you need to do to add the hard drive to the virtual machine?
A. Go to the virtual machine settings and use the New Hard Drive Wizard.
B. On the Hyper-V host, add the hard drive to the virtual machine by using Disk  
Management.
C. Shut down the virtual machine, then go into the virtual machine settings and use the 
New Hard Drive Wizard to add the drive.
D. You cannot add another hard drive to an existing virtual machine.

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  67
75. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You manage a computer that runs 
Windows Server 2016 and has Hyper-V enabled. You create two virtual machines that can 
communicate with each other and with the host operating system. The virtual machines are 
not able to connect to the Internet. What should you do if you need to ensure that the vir-
tual machines can connect to the Internet?
A. Create an external virtual switch.
B. Configure the MAC Address Range.
C. Configure NUMA Spanning.
D. Configure Enhanced Session Mode.
76. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing Hyper-V, 
and one of the key features allows a processor to access its local memory more quickly than 
memory located on another processor. It allows a system to access memory quickly by provid -
ing separate memory on each processor. What key feature is being described?
A. Automatic Virtual Machine Activation (AVMA)
B. Discrete Device Assignment (DDA)
C. Virtual Machine Queue (VMQ)
D. Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA)
77. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing 
Hyper-V. You know that Hyper-V provides a virtualization layer that runs directly on the 
system hardware. What is this layer of the microkernel architecture called?
A. Hypervisor
B. Hyper Virtual Machine Assistant
C. Hyper Virtual Assistant
D. Virtual Assistant
78. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing 
Hyper-V, and one of the key features is Enhanced Session Mode, which enhances the inter-
active session of the Virtual Machine Connection for Hyper-V administrators who want to 
connect to their virtual machines. Enhanced Session Mode gives administrators benefits for 
 . (Fill in the blank.)
A. Remote resource redirection
B. Remote device redirection
C. Local resource redirection
D. Local device redirection
79. You are the administrator for your company network. You are planning on installing  
Hyper-V, and you have heard of a new feature of Hyper-V in Windows Server 2016 that allows 
you to run a virtual machine within a virtual machine. What is this new feature called?
A. Virtual machine queue
B. Hyper-V nesting
C. Network isolation
D. Shared virtual hard disk

68 Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V
80. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 connects to your corporate network. The corporate 
network uses the 10.10.0.0/16 address space. Server1 hosts a virtual machine named VM1; 
VM1 is configured to have an IP address of 172.16.1.54/16. You need to ensure that VM1 
can access the resources on the corporate network. What should you connect VM1 to?
A. An external virtual switch
B. An internal virtual switch
C. A private virtual switch
D. A public virtual switch
81. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 connects to your corporate network. The corporate 
network uses the 10.10.0.0/16 address space. Server1 hosts a virtual machine named VM1, 
which is configured to have an IP address of 172.16.1.54/16. You need to ensure that VM1 
can access the resources on the corporate network. What should you run on Server1?
A. Add-VMNetworkAdapterRoutingDomainMapping
B. Get-VMNetworkAdapterRoutingDomainMapping
C. Netsh.exe
D. Route.exe
82. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server 1 hosts a virtual machine named VM1 that runs 
Windows Server 2016. Server1 has a USB 3.0 device attached to a PCI Express (PCIe) bus. 
What three actions should you perform if you need to provide VM1 with pass-through 
access to the USB 3.0 device? (Choose three.)
A. Run the Dismount-VMHostAssignableDevice  cmdlet on Server1.
B. Run the Add-VMAssignableDevice  cmdlet on Server1.
C. Run the Disable-PnPDevice  cmdlet on Server1.
D. Run the Enable-PnPDevice  cmdlet on VM1.
E. Run the Mount-VMHostAssignableDevice  cmdlet on VM1.
83. You are the administrator for your company network. You have two Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V hosts named Server1 and Server2. Server1 hosts a virtual machine named VM1 
that is in a Running state. On Server1, you export VM1 and then you import VM1 on 
Server2. On Server2, what is the current state of VM1?
A. Off
B. Saved
C. Running
D. Paused

Chapter 3  ■ I mplement Hyper-V  69
84. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. Hyper-V provides two tools that 
allow you to manage virtual hard disks. These tools can be found on the Action pane in 
Hyper-V Manager. What are these two tools? (Choose two.)
A. Examine Disk
B. Inspect Disk
C. Edit Disk
D. Manage Disk
85. You are the administrator for your company network. Windows Server 2016 Hyper-V has 
a feature that is used to bridge the memory gap between minimum memory and startup 
memory. This allows your virtual machines to restart properly. What is the name of this 
feature?
A. Smart Paging
B. Checkpoints
C. Memory
D. Integration Services

Chapter 
4Implement Windows 
Containers
The follo WIng MCSA W IndoWS Server 
2016 exAM TopICS Are Covered In ThIS 
ChApTer:
✓ ✓4.1 D eploy Windows containers
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Determine 
installation requirements and appropriate scenarios for 
Windows Containers; install and configure Windows Server 
container host in physical or virtualized environments; install 
and configure Windows Server container host to Windows 
Server Core or Nano Server in a physical or virtualized 
environment; install Docker on Windows Server and Nano 
Server; configure Docker startup options; install PowerShell 
for Docker; install a base container image; tag an image; 
remove a container; create Windows Server containers; 
create Hyper-V Containers
✓ ✓4.2 M anage Windows containers
✓■This objective may include but is not limited to: Manage 
Windows containers by using Docker CLI and PowerShell for 
Docker; manage container networking; manage container 
data volumes; manage Resource Control; create new 
container images using Dockerfile; manage container images 
using Docker Hub repository for public and private scenarios; 
manage container images using Microsoft Azure

72 Chapter 4  ■ I mplement Windows Containers
1. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V server named Server1. Server1 has an IP address of 192.168.1.78 and has a 
container named Container1 that hosts a web application on port 84. Container1 has 
an IP address of 172.16.5.6 and a port mapping from port 80 on Server1 to port 84 on 
Container1. You have a server named Server2 that has an IP address of 192.168.1.79. To 
what IP address and port should you connect if you need to connect to the web application 
from Server2?
A. 192.168.1.78:84
B. 192.168.1.78:80
C. 172.16.5.6:80
D. 172.16.5.6:84
2. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Hyper-V host named Server1. Server1 has a virtual machine named VM1 that is configured 
to run the Docker daemon. On VM1 you have a container network that uses transparent 
mode. What should you do if you need to ensure that containers that run on VM1 can 
obtain IP addresses from DHCP?
A. Run docker network connect  on Server1.
B. Run docker network connect  on VM1.
C. Run Get-VMNetworkAdapter-VMName VM1| Set-VMNetworkAdapter- 
MacAddressSpoofing On  on VM1.
D. Run Get-VMNetworkAdapter-VMName VM1| Set-VMNetworkAdapter- 
MacAddressSpoofing On  on Server1.
3. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1 and you install the Docker daemon. What should you do if you need 
to configure the Docker daemon to accept connections only on TCP port 64500?
A. Edit the daemon.json  file.
B. Edit the configuration JSON file.
C. Run the New-NetFirewallRule  cmdlet.
D. Run the Set-Service  cmdlet.
4. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1. You plan to deploy Internet Information Services (IIS) in a Windows 
container. What three actions should you perform if you need to prepare Server1 for the 
planned deployment? (Choose three.)
A. Install the Hyper-V Server role.
B. Install the Base Container images.
C. Install the Container feature.
D. Install the Web Server role.
E. Install Docker.

Chapter 4  ■ I mplement Windows Containers  73
5. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing container types 
with a colleague. Which container type provides application isolation through process 
and namespace isolation technology and shares a kernel with the container host and all 
containers running on the host?
A. Hyper-V Container
B. Windows Server Container
C. Docker Container
D. Docker Daemon Container
6. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 server 
named Server1 that runs the Docker daemon. What should you do if you need to ensure that 
members of a security group named Docker Administrators can administer Docker?
A. Run the sc privs  command.
B. Edit the daemon.json  file.
C. Add Docker Administrators to the local Administrators group.
D. Edit the configuration.json  file.
7. You are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
container host named Server1. What parameter should you use with the docker run  
command if you need to start a Hyper-V Container on Server1?
A. ––entrypoint
B. ––expose
C. ––runtime
D. ––isolation
E. ––privileged
8. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
container host named Server1. On Server1, you create a container named Container1. What 
should you run if you need to mount C:\ContainerFiles  from Server1 to Container1?
A. dockerd ––storage-opt dm.mountopt=ContainerFiles Container1
B. docker run -it -vC:\ContainerFiles:c:\ContainerFiles Container1
C. dockerd ––storage-opt dm.datadev=/c/ContainerFiles Container1
D. docker run -it -v c:\ContainerFiles Container1
9. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
server named Server1 that has the Containers feature installed. You create a text file that 
contains the commands that will be used to automate the creation of new containers. What 
should you name the file if you need to ensure that the commands in the text file are used 
when you create new containers?
A. Bootstrap.ini
B. Config.ini
C. Dockerfile
D. Unattend.txt

74 Chapter 4  ■ I mplement Windows Containers
10. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have a Windows Server 2016 
Nano Server named Nano1. You deploy several containers to Nano1 that use an image 
named Image1. What should you run if you need to deploy a new container to Nano1 that 
uses Image1?
A. The docker run  command
B. The docker load  command
C. Install-NanoServerPackage  cmdlet
D. Install-WindowsFeature  cmdlet
11. You are the administrator for your company network. You are having a discussion with a 
colleague regarding the use of Docker and Windows Containers. Which of the following 
statements is true?
A. The Docker application does not need to be installed to work with Windows 
Containers.
B. The Docker application does need to be installed to work with Windows Containers.
C. Neither needs to be installed; they are both already installed by default.
D. Each operates separately and they do not work together.
12. You are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing the Docker 
Restart Policy with a colleague. What is the default setting for a container when working 
with the Docker Restart Policy?
A. always
B. on-failure[:max-retries]
C. no
D. unless-stopped
13. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. One of the advantages of using 
Docker is that you can go to Docker’s website to look at the different images that are avail-
able. There are images for operating systems, applications, and software. But what happens 
if you can’t find an image that meets your needs?
A. You must find the image template that best matches your needs.
B. Just create your own Dockerfile.
C. Just pick the image template that most closely resembles what you are looking for.
D. There is nothing you can do.
14. You are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
how Windows Containers differ from Hyper-V Containers. Which statement is true?
A. There are no differences.
B. Windows Containers utilize their own instance of the Windows kernel and Hyper-V 
Containers share the system’s kernel between all containers and the host.
C. Windows Containers utilize their own instance of the Windows kernel and Hyper-V 
Containers utilize the system’s kernel on just the host.
D. Windows Containers share the system’s kernel between all containers and the host and 
Hyper-V Containers utilize their own instance of the Windows kernel.

Chapter 4  ■ I mplement Windows Containers  75
15. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have just installed Docker. 
When you install Docker, how many networks are created automatically?
A. 1
B. 2
C. 3
D. 4
16. You are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
the Azure Container Service and what it can be used for. Which statement is true?
A. The Azure Container Service uses proprietary scheduling and management tools.
B. The Azure Container Service uses open source scheduling and management tools.
C. The Azure Container Service uses commercial scheduling and management tools.
D. The Azure Container Service uses registered scheduling and management tools.
17. You are the administrator for your company network. You want to view the information 
about containers. What PowerShell cmdlet will allow you to view that information?
A. Get-ContainerHost
B. Get-ContainerNetworkAdapter
C. Get-ContainerImage
D. Get-Container
18. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing Dockerfile 
commands with a colleague. What Dockerfile command allows you to create a mount point 
and externally mounted volumes from host systems or other containers?
A. Volume
B. Onbuild
C. Expose
D. Run
19. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. The company has decided to start 
using containers. What command would you use to create a new container?
A. docker build container
B. docker create
C. docker new
D. docker build
20. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. The company has decided 
to start using containers. You have created some images. Now you’d like to see the images 
you created. What command allows you to see your images?
A. docker see
B. docker images
C. docker info
D. docker view

76 Chapter 4  ■ I mplement Windows Containers
21. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. The company has decided 
to start using containers. You need to build and use a Dockerfile. What command would 
you use if you need to compile and create an image using the Dockerfile?
A. docker build
B. docker run
C. docker compile
D. docker rm
22. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. The company has decided 
to start using containers. You need to build and use a Dockerfile. What command would 
you use if you need to execute commands within the Dockerfile?
A. docker build
B. docker run
C. docker compile
D. docker rm
23. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. The company has decided 
to start using containers. You need to build and use a Dockerfile. What command would 
you use if you need to delete a container?
A. docker delete
B. docker kill container
C. delete-docker-Container
D. remove-container
24. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. The company has decided 
to start using containers. You need to build a new image using Windows Server Core. What 
command would you use to get a Windows Server Core image?
A. docker get microsoft/windowsservercore
B. docker run microsoft/windowsservercore
C. docker pull microsoft/windowsservercore
D. docker build microsoft/windowsservercore
25. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. The company has decided to start 
using containers. Your supervisor wants to know which client operating systems can host 
containers. Which of the following client operating systems do you tell him? (Choose all 
that apply.)
A. Windows 7 Professional
B. Windows 8.1 Enterprise
C. Windows 10 Home
D. Windows 10 Enterprise (Anniversary Update)
E. Windows Server 2016

Chapter 4  ■ I mplement Windows Containers  77
26. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. The network contains an Active 
Directory domain. The domain contains a Windows Server 2016 server named Server1. 
Server1 allows inbound connectivity from all computers in the domain. Server1 has an IP 
address of 192.168.0.10 and hosts a Windows container named Container1. Container1 
hosts a website that is accessible on port 80. You need to ensure that you can use the 
Docker client to manage Container1 from any computer in the domain. What four cmdlets 
should you run? (Choose four.)
A. Restart-Service docker
B. New-ContainerNetwork- Name nat1 -Mode NAT-SubnetPrefix 192.168.0.0/24 
-GatewayAddress 192.168.0.10
C. Add-Content 'c:\programdata\docker\config\daemon.json' '{"hosts": 
["tcp://127.0.0.1:80", "npipe://"]}'
D. Add-Content 'c"\programdata\docker\config\daemon.json' '{"hosts": 
[tcp://0.0.0.0:2375", npipe://" ] }']
E. New-Item-Type File c:\programData\docker\config\daemon.json
27. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. The network has a main office and 
three branch offices and consists of an Active Directory domain. The main office contains 
three domain controllers and each branch office has one domain controller. You discover 
that the new settings in the Default Domain Policy are not applied in one of the branch 
offices, but all other Group Policy Objects (GPOs) are applied. What should you do from 
a domain controller in the main office if you need to check the replication of the Default 
Domain Policy for the branch office?
A. From Group Policy Management, click Default Domain Policy and then open the 
Details tab.
B. From Group Policy Management, click Default Domain Policy and then open the  
Scope tab.
C. Run repadmin.exe  from a command prompt.
D. Run dcdiag.exe  from a command prompt.
28. You are the administrator for your company network. You and a colleague are discussing 
Windows Containers. Which of the following statements is true regarding Windows Containers?
A. They are independent and isolated environments that run an operating system.
B. They are independent and isolated environments that support user Home Folders.
C. They are dependent and non-isolated environments that run an operating system.
D. They are dependent and non-isolated environments that support user Home Folders.
29. You are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing container types 
with a colleague. Which container type runs within a virtual machine, and the container 
host’s kernel is not shared between the other containers?
A. Hyper-V Container
B. Windows Server Container
C. Docker Container
D. Docker Daemon Container

78 Chapter 4  ■ I mplement Windows Containers
30. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing Container 
components with a colleague. Which component can be on a physical or virtual machine, 
and is configured with the Windows Container feature?
A. Container Image
B. Container Host
C. Container OS Image
D. Container Registry
31. You are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing Container 
components with a colleague. Which component contains all of the layers of the container?
A. Container Image
B. Container Host
C. Container OS Image
D. Container Registry
32. You are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing Container 
components with a colleague. Your colleague is telling you about the component that runs 
the Docker application. What is this component called?
A. Container Registry
B. Docker daemon
C. Dockerfile
D. Docker Hub repositories
33. You are the administrator of your company network. You are planning on using containers 
on a virtualized network. You currently have the Hyper-V role installed on the system 
and have the Windows Server 2016 operating system installed. You are concerned that 
you might not have enough RAM. What is the minimum amount of RAM required to run 
containers in a virtualized network?
A. 2 GB
B. 4 GB
C. 6 GB
D. 8 GB
34. You are the administrator for your company network. The company has decided to start 
using containers. You want to see what version of Windows you have installed because you 
know that the operating system on the host machine must match the operating system of 
the Windows Container. What is one tool can you use to see what version of Windows is 
currently installed on the host machine?
A. repadmin.exe
B. dcdiag.exe
C. regedit.exe
D. perfmon.exe

Chapter 4  ■ I mplement Windows Containers  79
35. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. The company has decided to install 
Docker. Which of the following statements regarding Docker are true? (Choose all that 
apply.)
A. It is a software package that allows you to create and manipulate containers and images.
B. It is a hardware package that allows you to create and manipulate containers and images.
C. It is a third-party application that Microsoft uses for containers.
D. It consists of a Docker engine and a Docker client (Docker daemon).
36. You are the administrator for your company network. The company has decided to 
start using containers. You need to find out which version of Windows is installed on 
the host machine. What registry key should you search for to see the version currently 
installed?
A. HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Microsoft\Windows 10\CurrentVersion
B. HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Microsoft\Windows 2016\CurrentVersion
C. HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Microsoft\Windows \CurrentVersion
D. HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion
37. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have installed Docker. There are 
some Docker switches that can be used. The Docker switches can be run in PowerShell or 
at an elevated command prompt. Which command allows an administrator to debug and 
build a new image?
A. docker attack
B. docker build
C. docker commit
D. docker deploy
38. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have installed Docker. There are 
some Docker switches that can be used. The Docker switches can be run in PowerShell or at 
an elevated command prompt. Administrators use which command to create and modify a 
stack?
A. docker attack
B. docker build
C. docker commit
D. docker deploy
39. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have installed Docker. You 
plan on using the Docker command that allows you to copy files and folders between the 
container and the local computer system. What command do you use?
A. docker copy
B. docker cp
C. docker create
D. docker replicate

80 Chapter 4  ■ I mplement Windows Containers
40. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have installed Docker. You 
plan on using the Docker command that allows you to view all of the containers. What 
command do you use?
A. docker ps
B. docker examine
C. docker containers
D. docker replicate
41. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You are discussing the Docker 
Restart Policy with a colleague. What Docker Restart Policy setting will try to restart the 
container indefinitely as well as always start on daemon startup?
A. always
B. on-failure[:max-retries]
C. no
D. unless-stopped
42. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. The company has decided 
to start using containers. You want to look to see if any containers are currently running. 
What command will allow you to see which containers are running?
A. docker see
B. docker images
C. docker info
D. docker view
43. Y ou are the administrator for your company network. You have installed Docker. You 
plan on using the Docker command that allows you to pull an image from a registry. What 
command do you use?
A. docker pull
B. docker push
C. docker ps
D. docker run
44. Y ou are the network administrator for your company network. The company has decided 
to start using containers. You have decided to delete an image from a container. What 
command would you use to delete an image from a container?
A. docker remove
B. docker delete
C. docker rmv
D. docker rm


[Note: PDF has 434 pages, only first 100 pages extracted]