Scanned by kineticstomp
THE ART OF DECEPTION
Controlling the Human Element of Security
KEVIN D. MITNICK
& William L. Simon
Foreword by Steve Wozniak

For Reba Vartanian, Shelly Jaffe, Chickie Leventhal, and Mitchell
Mitnick, and for the late Alan Mitnick, Adam Mitnick,
and Jack Biello
For Arynne, Victoria, and David, Sheldon,Vincent, and Elena.
Social Engineering
Social Engineering uses influence and persuasion to deceive people
by convincing them that the social engineer is someone he is not,
or by manipulation. As a result, the social engineer is able to take
advantage of people to obtain information with or without the use of
technology.
Contents
Foreword
Preface
Introduction
Part 1 Behind the Scenes
Chapter 1 Security's Weakest Link
Part 2 The Art of the Attacker
Chapter 2 When Innocuous Information Isn't
Chapter 3 The Direct Attack: Just Asking for it
Chapter 4 Building Trust
Chapter 5 "Let Me Help You"
Chapter 6 "Can You Help Me?"
Chapter 7 Phony Sites and Dangerous Attachments
Chapter 8 Using Sympathy, Guilt and Intimidation
Chapter 9 The Reverse Sting
Part 3 Intruder Alert
Chapter 10 Entering the Premises
Chapter 11 Combining Technology and Social Engineering
Chapter 12 Attacks on the Entry-Level Employee
Chapter 13 Clever Cons
Chapter 14 Industrial Espionage

Part 4 Raising the Bar
Chapter 15 Information Security Awareness and Training
Chapter 16 Recommended Corporate Information Security Policies
Security at a Glance
Sources
Acknowledgments
Foreword
We humans are born with an inner drive to explore the nature
of our surroundings. As young men, both Kevin Mitnick and
I were intensely curious about the world and eager to prove
ourselves. We were rewarded often in our attempts to learn new things,
solve puzzles, and win at games. But at the same time, the world around
us taught us rules of behavior that constrained our inner urge toward free
exploration. For our boldest scientists and technological entrepreneurs, as
well as for people like Kevin Mitnick, following this inner urge offers the
greatest thrills, letting us accomplish things that others believe cannot be
done.
Kevin Mitnick is one of the finest people I know. Ask him, and he will
say forthrightly that what he used to do - social engineering - involes
conning people. But Kevin is no longer a social engineer. And even when
he was, his motive never was to enrich himself or damage others. That's
not to say that there aren't dangerous and destructive criminals out there
who use social engineering to cause real harm. In fact, that's exactly why
Kevin wrote this book - to warn you about them.
The Art of Deception shows how vulnerable we all are - government,
business, and each of us personally - to the intrusions of the social
engineer. In this security-conscious era, we spend huge sums on
technology
to protect our computer networks and data. This book points out how easy
it is to trick insiders and circumvent all this technological protection.
Whether you work in business or government, this book provides a
powerful road map to help you understand how social engineers work and
what you can do to foil them. Using fictionalized stories that are both

entertaining and eye-opening, Kevin and co-author Bill Simon bring to
life
the techniques of the social engineering underworld. After each story,
they offer practical guidelines to help you guard against the breaches and
threats they're described.
Technological security leaves major gaps that people like Kevin can help
us close. Read this book and you may finally realize that we all need to
turn to the Mitnick's among us for guidance.
-Steve Wozniak

PREFACE
Some hackers destroy people's files orentire hard drives; they're called
crackers orvandals. Some novice hackers don't bother learning the
technology, butsimply download hacker tools tobreak into computer
systems; they're called script kiddies. More experienced hackers with
programming skills develop hacker programs andpost them totheWeb
andtobulletin board systems. And then there areindividuals who have no
interest inthetechnology, butusethecomputer merely asatool toaid
them in stealing money, goods, or services. 
Despite themedia-created myth ofKevin Mitnick, Iamnotamalicious
hacker. 
But I'm getting ahead of myself. 
STARTING OUT 
Mypath was probably setearly inlife. Iwas ahappy-go-lucky kid, but
bored. After myfather split when Iwas three, mymother worked asa
waitress tosupport us.Toseemethen -anonly child being raised bya
mother who putinlong, harried days onasometimes-erratic schedule -
would have been toseeayoungster onhisown almost allhiswaking
hours. I was my own babysitter. 
Growing upinaSanFernando Valley community gave methewhole of
LosAngeles toexplore, andbytheageoftwelve Ihaddiscovered away
totravel free throughout thewhole greater L.A. area. Irealized oneday
while riding thebusthatthesecurity ofthebustransfer Ihadpurchased
relied ontheunusual pattern ofthepaper-punch, thatthedrivers used to
mark day; time, and route onthetransfer slips. Afriendly driver,
answering mycarefully planted question, told mewhere tobuy that
special type of punch. 
Thetransfers aremeant toletyouchange buses andcontinue ajourney to
your destination, butIworked outhow tousethem totravel anywhere I
wanted to go for free. Obtaining blank transfers was a walk in the park. 
 

The trash bins atthebusterminals were always filled with only-partly
used books oftransfers that thedrivers tossed away attheend ofthe
shifts. With apadofblanks andthepunch, Icould mark myown transfers
and travel anywhere that L.A. buses went. Before long, Ihad allbut
memorized thebusschedules oftheentire system. (This was anearly
example ofmysurprising memory forcertain types ofinformation; Ican
still, today, remember phone numbers, passwords, andother seemingly
trivial details as far back as my childhood.) 
Another personal interest that surfaced at an early age was my fascination
with performing magic. Once I learned how a new trick worked, would
practice, practice, and practice some more until I mastered it. To an
extent, it was through magic that I discovered the enjoyment in gaining
secret knowledge. 
From Phone Phreak to Hacker 
My first encounter with what Iwould eventually learn tocall social
engineering came about during myhigh school years when Imetanother
student who was caught upinahobby called phone phreakin. Phone
phreaking isatype ofhacking thatallows you toexplore thetelephone
network byexploiting thephone systems andphone company employees.
He showed me neat tricks he could do with a telephone, like obtaining any
information thephone company hadonanycustomer, andusing asecret
testnumber tomake long-distance calls forfree. (Actually itwasfreeonly
tous.Ifound outmuch later thatitwasn't asecret testnumber atall.The
calls were, in fact, being billed to some poor company's MCI account.) 
That was myintroduction tosocial engineering-my kindergarten, soto
speak. Myfriend andanother phone phreaker Imetshortly thereafter let
melisten inasthey each made pretext calls tothephone company. Iheard
thethings they said that made them sound believable; Ilearned about
different phone company offices, lingo, and procedures. But that
"training" didn't lastlong; itdidn't have to.Soon Iwasdoing itallonmy
own, learning as I went, doing it even better than my first teachers. 
Thecourse mylifewould follow forthenext fifteen years hadbeen set.In
high school, oneofmyall-time favorite pranks wasgaining unauthorized
access tothetelephone switch and changing theclass ofservice ofa
fellow phone phreak. When he'd attempt tomake acallfrom home, he'd
getamessage telling him todeposit adime because thetelephone

company switch hadreceived input thatindicated hewas calling from a
pay phone. 

Ibecame absorbed ineverything about telephones, not only the
electronics, switches, andcomputers, butalso thecorporate organization,
theprocedures, andtheterminology. After awhile, Iprobably knew more
about thephone system than anysingle employee. And Ihaddeveloped
mysocial engineering skills tothepoint that, atseventeen years old,Iwas
able totalk most telco employees into almost anything, whether Iwas
speaking with them in person or by telephone. 
Mymuch-publicized hacking career actually started when Iwas inhigh
school. While Icannot describe thedetail here, suffice ittosaythatoneof
thedriving forces inmyearly hacks wastobeaccepted bytheguys inthe
hacker group. 
Back then weused theterm hacker tomean aperson who spent agreat
deal oftime tinkering with hardware andsoftware, either todevelop more
efficient programs ortobypass unnecessary steps andgetthejobdone
more quickly. The term has now become apejorative, carrying the
meaning of"malicious criminal." Inthese pages Iusetheterm theway I
have always used it - in its earlier, more benign sense. 
After high school Istudied computers attheComputer Learning Center in
Los Angeles. Within afew months, theschool's computer manager
realized Ihadfound vulnerability intheoperating system andgained full
administrative privileges ontheir IBM minicomputer. The best computer
experts ontheir teaching staff couldn't figure outhow Ihaddone this. In
what may have been oneoftheearliest examples of"hire thehacker," I
wasgiven anoffer Icouldn't refuse: Doanhonors project toenhance the
school's computer security, orface suspension forhacking thesystem. Of
course, Ichose todothehonors project, andended upgraduating cum
laude with honors. 
Becoming a Social Engineer 
Some people getoutofbed each morning dreading their daily work
routine attheproverbial saltmines. I'vebeen lucky enough toenjoy my
work. nparticular, youcan't imagine thechallenge, reward, andpleasure I
had thetime Ispent asaprivate investigator. Iwas honing mytalents in
theperformance artcalled social engineering (getting people todothings
they wouldn't ordinarily do for a stranger) and being paid for it. 

Formeitwasn't difficult becoming proficient insocial engineering. My
father's side ofthefamily hadbeen inthesales field forgenerations, so
theartofinfluence and persuasion might have been aninherited trait.
When youcombine thattrait with aninclination fordeceiving people, you
have the profile of a typical social engineer. 

You might saythere aretwo specialties within thejobclassification of
conartist. Somebody who swindles andcheats people outoftheir money
belongs toonesub-specialty, thegrifter. Somebody who uses deception,
influence, and persuasion against businesses, usually targeting their
information, belongs totheother sub-specialty, thesocial engineer. From
thetime ofmybus-transfer trick, when Iwas tooyoung toknow there
was anything wrong with what Iwas doing, Ihadbegun torecognize a
talent forfinding outthesecrets Iwasn't supposed tohave. Ibuilt onthat
talent byusing deception, knowing thelingo, and developing awell-
honed skill of manipulation. 
One way Iworked ondeveloping theskills ofmycraft, ifImay callita
craft, wastopick outsome piece ofinformation Ididn't really care about
and seeifIcould talk somebody ontheother end ofthephone into
providing it,justtoimprove myskills. Inthesame way Iused topractice
mymagic tricks, Ipracticed pretexting. Through these rehearsals, Isoon
found that I could acquire virtually any information I targeted.   
AsIdescribed inCongressional testimony before Senators Lieberman and
Thompson years later: 
Ihave gained unauthorized access tocomputer systems atsome ofthe
largest corporations ontheplanet, andhave successfully penetrated some
ofthemost resilient computer systems ever developed. Ihave used both
technical andnon-technical means toobtain thesource code tovarious
operating systems and telecommunications devices tostudy their
vulnerabilities  and their inner workings. 
Allofthisactivity was really tosatisfy myown curiosity; toseewhat I
could do;andfind outsecret information about operating systems, cell
phones, and anything else that stirred my curiosity. 
FINAL THOUGHTS 
I'veacknowledged since myarrest thattheactions Itook were illegal, and
that I committed invasions of privacy. 
Mymisdeeds were motivated bycuriosity. Iwanted toknow asmuch asI
could about how phone networks worked and the ins-and-outs of
computer security. Iwent from being akidwho loved toperform magic
tricks tobecoming the world's most notorious hacker, feared by

corporations andthegovernment. AsIreflect back onmylifeforthelast
30years, Iadmit Imade some extremely poor decisions, driven bymy
curiosity, thedesire tolearn about technology, andtheneed foragood
intellectual challenge. 
 

I'machanged person now. I'mturning mytalents and theextensive
knowledge I've gathered about information security and social
engineering tactics tohelping government, businesses, and individuals
prevent, detect, and respond to information-security threats.
This book isonemore way thatIcanusemyexperience tohelp others
avoid theefforts ofthemalicious information thieves oftheworld. Ithink
you will find the stories enjoyable, eye-opening, and educational.
 

Introduction    
This book contains a wealth of information about information security and
social engineering. Tohelp youfind your way, here's aquick look athow
this book is organized: 
InPart 1I'llreveal security's weakest link andshow you why you and
your company are at risk from social engineering attacks. 
InPart2you'll seehow social engineers toywith your trust, your desire to
behelpful, your sympathy, andyour human gullibility togetwhat they
want. Fictional stories oftypical attacks will demonstrate that social
engineers canwear many hats andmany faces. Ifyouthink you've never
encountered one, you're probably wrong. Will you recognize ascenario
you've experienced inthese stories andwonder ifyou hadabrush with
social engineering? You very well might. Butonce you've read Chapters 2
through 9,you'll know how togettheupper hand when thenext social
engineer comes calling.   
Part 3isthepartofthebook where youseehow thesocial engineer ups
theante, inmade-up stories that show how hecan step onto your
corporate premises, steal thekind ofsecret thatcanmake orbreak your
company, andthwart your hi-tech security measures. Thescenarios inthis
section will make youaware ofthreats thatrange from simple employee
revenge tocyber terrorism. Ifyouvalue theinformation thatkeeps your
business running and theprivacy ofyour data, you'll want toread
Chapters 10 through 14 from beginning to end. 
It'simportant tonote that unless otherwise stated, theanecdotes inthis
book are purely fictional. 
InPart 4Italkthecorporate talkabout how toprevent successful social
engineering attacks onyour organization. Chapter 15provides ablueprint
forasuccessful security-training program. And Chapter 16might just
save your neck -it'sacomplete security policy you cancustomize for
your organization andimplement right away tokeep your company and
information safe. 

Finally, I've provided aSecurity ataGlance section, which includes
checklists, tables, andcharts thatsummarize keyinformation youcanuse
tohelp your employees foilasocial engineering attack onthejob.These
tools also provide valuable information youcanuseindevising your own
security-training program. 
Throughout thebook you'll also find several useful elements: Lingo boxes
provide definitions ofsocial engineering and computer hacker
terminology; Mitnick Messages offer brief words ofwisdom tohelp
strengthen your security strategy; andnotes andsidebars give interesting
background or additional information. 

Part 1
Behind The Scenes  

Chapter 1
Security's Weakest Link 
A company may have purchased the best security technologies that money
canbuy, trained their people sowell that they lock upalltheir secrets
before going home atnight, and hired building guards from thebest
security firm in the business. 
That company is still totally Vulnerable. 
Individuals may follow every best-security practice recommended bythe
experts, slavishly install every recommended security product, and be
thoroughly vigilant about proper system configuration and applying
security patches. 
Those individuals are still completely vulnerable. 
THE HUMAN FACTOR 
Testifying before Congress notlong ago, Iexplained thatIcould often get
passwords andother pieces ofsensitive information from companies by
pretending to be someone else and just asking for it. 
It'snatural toyearn forafeeling ofabsolute safety, leading many people
tosettle forafalse sense ofsecurity. Consider theresponsible andloving
homeowner who hasaMedico, atumbler lock known asbeing pickproof,
installed inhisfront door toprotect hiswife, hischildren, andhishome.
He's now comfortable that hehasmade hisfamily much safer against
intruders. Butwhat about theintruder-who breaks awindow, orcracks the
code tothegarage door opener? How about installing arobust security
system? Better, but still noguarantee. Expensive locks orno, the
homeowner remains vulnerable. 
Why? Because the human factor is truly security's weakest link. 

Security is too often merely an illusion, an illusion sometimes made even
worse when gullibility, naivete, or ignorance come into play. The world's
most respected scientist of the twentieth century, Albert Einstein, is
quoted as saying, "Only two things are infinite, the universe and human
stupidity, and I'm not sure about the former." In the end, social
engineering attacks can succeed when people are stupid or, more
commonly, simply ignorant about good security practices. With the same
attitude as our security-conscious homeowner, many information
technology (IT) professionals hold to the misconception that they've made
their companies largely immune to attack because they've deployed
standard security products - firewalls, intrusion detection systems, or
stronger authentication devices such as time-based tokens or biometric
smart cards. Anyone who thinks that security products alone offer true
security is settling for. the illusion of security. It's a case of living in a
world of fantasy: They will inevitably, later if not sooner, suffer a security
incident.
As noted security consultant Bruce Schneier puts it, "Security is not a
product, it's a process." Moreover, security is not a technology problem -
it's a people and management problem. 
Asdevelopers invent continually better security technologies, making it
increasingly difficult toexploit technical vulnerabilities, attackers will
turnmore andmore toexploiting thehuman element. Cracking thehuman
firewall isoften easy, requires noinvestment beyond thecost ofaphone
call, and involves minimal risk. 
A CLASSIC CASE OF DECEPTION 
What's thegreatest threat tothesecurity ofyour business assets? That's
easy: the social engineer--an unscrupulous magician who has you
watching hislefthand while with hisright hesteals your secrets. This
character isoften sofriendly, glib, andobliging that you're grateful for
having encountered him. 
Take alook atanexample ofsocial engineering. Notmany people today
stillremember theyoung man named Stanley Mark Rifkin andhislittle
adventure with thenow defunct Security Pacific National Bank inLos
Angeles. Accounts ofhisescapade vary, andRifkin (like me) hasnever
told his own story, so the following is based on published reports. 

Code Breaking 
One dayin1978, Rifkin moseyed over toSecurity Pacific's authorized-
personnel-only wire-transfer room, where thestaff sent and received
transfers totaling several billion dollars every day. 

Hewas working foracompany under contract todevelop abackup
system forthewire room's data incase their main computer ever went
down. That rolegave himaccess tothetransfer procedures, including how
bank officials arranged foratransfer tobesent. Hehadlearned thatbank
officers who were authorized toorder wire transfers would begiven a
closely guarded daily code each morning tousewhen calling thewire
room.
Inthewire room theclerks saved themselves thetrouble oftrying to
memorize each day's code: They wrote down thecode onaslipofpaper
andposted itwhere they could seeiteasily. This particular November day
Rifkin hadaspecific reason forhisvisit. Hewanted togetaglance atthat
paper.
Arriving inthewire room, hetook some notes onoperating procedures,
supposedly tomake sure thebackup system would mesh properly with the
regular systems. Meanwhile, hesurreptitiously read thesecurity code
from theposted slipofpaper, andmemorized it.Afewminutes later he
walked out. As he said afterward, he felt as if he had just won the lottery.
There's This Swiss Bank Account...
Leaving theroom atabout 3o'clock intheafternoon, heheaded straight
forthepayphone inthebuilding's marble lobby, where hedeposited a
coin and dialed into thewire-transfer room. Hethen changed hats,
transforming himself from Stanley Rifkin, bank consultant, into Mike
Hansen, a member of the bank's International Department.
According to one source, the conversation went something like this:
"Hi, thisisMike Hansen inInternational," hesaid totheyoung woman
who answered the phone.
Sheasked fortheoffice number. That wasstandard procedure, andhewas
prepared: “286” he said.
The girl then asked, "Okay, what's the code?"
Rifkin hassaid thathisadrenaline-powered heartbeat "picked upitspace"
atthispoint. Heresponded smoothly, "4789." Then hewent ontogive
instructions forwiring "Ten million, two-hundred thousand dollars
exactly" totheIrving Trust Company inNew York, forcredit ofthe

Wozchod Handels Bank ofZurich, Switzerland, where hehad already
established an account.
The girlthen said, "Okay, Igotthat. And now Ineed theinteroffice
settlement number."
Rifkin broke outinasweat; thiswas aquestion hehadn't anticipated,
something that had slipped through the cracks in his research. But he
 

managed tostay incharacter, acted asifeverything was fine, andonthe
spot answered without missing abeat, "Let mecheck; I'llcallyou right
back." Hechanged hatsonce again tocallanother department atthebank,
this time claiming tobeanemployee inthewire-transfer room. He
obtained the settlement number and called the girl back. 
Shetook thenumber andsaid, "Thanks." (Under thecircumstances, her
thanking him has to be considered highly ironic.) 
Achieving Closure 
Afew days later Rifkin flew toSwitzerland, picked uphiscash, and
handed over $8million toaRussian agency forapileofdiamonds. He
flew back, passing through U.S. Customs with thestones hidden ina
money belt. Hehadpulled offthebiggest bank heist inhistory--and done
itwithout using agun, even without acomputer. Oddly, hiscaper
eventually made itintothepages oftheGuinness Book ofWorld Records
in the category of "biggest computer fraud." 
Stanley Rifkin hadused theartofdeception--the skills andtechniques that
aretoday called social engineering. Thorough planning andagood giftof
gab is all it really took. 
And that's what thisbook isabout--the techniques ofsocial engineering
(atwhich yours truly isproficient) andhow todefend against their being
used at your company. 
THE NATURE OF THE THREAT 
The Rifkin story makes perfectly clear how misleading oursense of
security canbe.Incidents likethis-okay, maybe not$10million heists,
butharmful incidents nonetheless -arehappening every day. You may be
losing money right now, orsomebody may bestealing new product plans,
and you don't even know it.Ifithasn't already happened toyour
company, it's not a question of if it will happen, but when. 
A Growing Concern 
The Computer Security Institute, inits2001 survey ofcomputer crime,
reported that 85percent ofresponding organizations had detected
computer security breaches inthepreceding twelve months. That's an
astounding number: Only fifteen outofevery hundred organizations
responding were able tosaythatthey hadnothadasecurity breach during

theyear. Equally astounding was thenumber oforganizations that
reported that they had experienced financial losses due to computer 
  

breaches: 64percent. Well over half theorganizations had suffered
financially. In a single year.
Myown experiences lead metobelieve thatthenumbers inreports like
thisaresomewhat inflated. I'msuspicious oftheagenda ofthepeople
conducting thesurvey. But that's not tosay that thedamage isn't
extensive; itis.Those who failtoplan forasecurity incident areplanning
for failure.
Commercial security products deployed inmost companies aremainly
aimed atproviding protection against theamateur computer intruder, like
theyoungsters known asscript kiddies. Infact, these wannabe hackers
with downloaded software aremostly justanuisance. Thegreater losses,
thereal threats, come from sophisticated attackers with well-defined
targets who aremotivated byfinancial gain. These people focus onone
target atatime rather than, liketheamateurs, trying toinfiltrate asmany
systems aspossible. While amateur computer intruders simply gofor
quantity, the professionals target information of quality and value.
Technologies like authentication devices (for proving identity), access
control (formanaging access tofiles andsystem resources), andintrusion
detection systems (the electronic equivalent ofburglar alarms) are
necessary toacorporate security program. Yet it'stypical today fora
company tospend more money on coffee than on deploying
countermeasures to protect the organization against security attacks.
Just asthecriminal mind cannot resist temptation, thehacker mind is
driven tofind ways around powerful security technology safeguards. And
inmany cases, they dothat bytargeting thepeople who use the
technology.
Deceptive Practices
There's apopular saying thatasecure computer isonethat's turned off.
Clever, butfalse: The pretexter simply talks someone into going into the
office and turning that computer on.Anadversary who wants your
information canobtain it,usually inanyoneofseveral different ways. It's
justamatter oftime, patience, personality, andpersistence. That's where
the art of deception comes in.

Todefeat security measures, anattacker, intruder, orsocial engineer must
find away todeceive atrusted user intorevealing information, ortrick an
unsuspecting mark into providing him with access. When trusted
employees are deceived, influenced, ormanipulated into revealing
sensitive information, orperforming actions thatcreate asecurity hole for
theattacker toslip through, notechnology intheworld canprotect a
business. Justascryptanalysts aresometimes able toreveal theplain text
ofacoded message byfinding aweakness that letsthem bypass the
encryption
 

technology, social engineers use deception practiced on your employees
to bypass security technology. 
ABUSE OF TRUST 
Inmost cases, successful social engineers have strong people skills.
They're charming, polite, and easy tolike--social traits needed for
establishing rapid rapport and trust. Anexperienced social engineer is
able togain access tovirtually any targeted information byusing the
strategies and tactics of his craft. 
Savvy technologists have painstakingly developed information-security
solutions tominimize therisks connected with theuseofcomputers, yet
leftunaddressed themost significant vulnerability, thehuman factor.
Despite ourintellect, wehumans -you, me,andeveryone else -remain
the most severe threat to each other's security.  
 
Our National Character 
We're notmindful ofthethreat, especially intheWestern world. Inthe
United States most ofall,we're nottrained tobesuspicious ofeach other.
Wearetaught to"love thyneighbor" andhave trust and faith ineach
other. Consider how difficult itisforneighborhood watch organizations
togetpeople tolock their homes andcars. This sort ofvulnerability is
obvious, andyetitseems tobeignored bymany who prefer toliveina
dream world - until they get burned. 
Weknow thatallpeople arenotkind andhonest, buttoooften weliveas
ifthey were. This lovely innocence hasbeen thefabric ofthelives of
Americans andit'spainful togive itup.Asanation wehave built intoour
concept offreedom thatthebest places tolivearethose where locks and
keys are the least necessary. 
Most people goontheassumption that they will notbedeceived by
others, based upon abelief thattheprobability ofbeing deceived isvery
low; theattacker, understanding thiscommon belief, makes hisrequest
sound soreasonable thatitraises nosuspicion, allthewhile exploiting the
victim's trust.  
Organizational Innocence 

That innocence that ispart ofournational character was evident back
when computers were first being connected remotely. Recall that the
ARPANet (the Defense Department's Advanced Research Projects
Agency 
 

Network), thepredecessor oftheInternet, was designed asaway of
sharing research information between government, research, and
educational institutions. The goal was information freedom, aswell as
technological advancement. Many educational institutions therefore setup
early computer systems with little ornosecurity. One noted software
libertarian, Richard Stallman, even refused toprotect hisaccount with a
password.
Butwith theInternet being used forelectronic commerce, thedangers of
weak security inourwired world have changed dramatically. Deploying
more technology is not going to solve the human security problem.
Justlook atourairports today. Security hasbecome paramount, yetwe're
alarmed bymedia reports oftravelers who have been able tocircumvent
security and carry potential weapons past checkpoints. How isthis
possible during atime when ourairports areonsuch astate ofalert? Are
themetal detectors failing? No. The problem isn't themachines. The
problem isthehuman factor: The people manning themachines. Airport
officials canmarshal theNational Guard andinstall metal detectors and
facial recognition systems, buteducating thefrontline security staff on
how to properly screen passengers is much more likely to help.
The same problem exists within government, business, andeducational
institutions throughout the world. Despite the efforts ofsecurity
professionals, information everywhere remains vulnerable and will
continue tobeseen asaripe target byattackers with social engineering
skills, until theweakest link inthesecurity chain, thehuman link, has
been strengthened.
Now more than ever wemust learn tostop wishful thinking andbecome
more aware ofthetechniques thatarebeing used bythose who attempt to
attack theconfidentiality, integrity, and availability ofour computer
systems and networks. We've come toaccept theneed fordefensive
driving; it's time to accept and learn the practice of defensive computing.
The threat ofabreak-in that violates your privacy, your mind, oryour
company's information systems may notseem real until ithappens. To
avoid such acostly dose ofreality, weallneed tobecome aware,
educated, vigilant, andaggressively protective ofourinformation assets,

ourown personal information, and ournation's critical infrastructures.
And we must implement those precautions today.
TERRORISTS AND DECEPTION
Ofcourse, deception isn't anexclusive tool ofthesocial engineer.
Physical terrorism makes thebiggest news, andwehave come torealize
as never
 

before thattheworld isadangerous place. Civilization is,after all,justa
thin veneer. 
The attacks onNew York and Washington, D.C., inSeptember 2001
infused sadness and fear into thehearts ofevery one ofus-notjust
Americans, butwell-meaning people ofallnations. We're now alerted to
thefactthatthere areobsessive terrorists located around theglobe, well -
trained and waiting to launch further attacks against us. 
Therecently intensified effort byourgovernment hasincreased thelevels
ofoursecurity consciousness. Weneed tostay alert, onguard against all
forms ofterrorism. Weneed tounderstand how terrorists treacherously
create false identities, assume roles asstudents andneighbors, andmelt
into thecrowd. They mask their true beliefs while they plot against us-
practicing tricks ofdeception similar tothose youwillread about inthese
pages. 
And while, to the best of my knowledge, terrorists have not yet used
social engineering ruses to infiltrate corporations, water-treatment plants,
electrical generation facilities, or other vital components of our national
infrastructure, the potential is there. It's just too easy. The security
awareness and security policies that I hope will be put into place and
enforced by corporate senior management because of this book will come
none too  soon.  
ABOUT THIS BOOK   
Corporate security isaquestion ofbalance. Toolittle security leaves your
company vulnerable, butanoveremphasis onsecurity gets intheway of
attending tobusiness, inhibiting thecompany's growth and prosperity.
The challenge is to achieve a balance between security and productivity. 
Other books oncorporate security focus onhardware and software
technology, anddonotadequately cover themost serious threat ofall:
human deception. The purpose ofthisbook, incontrast, istohelp you
understand how you, your co-workers, andothers inyour company are
being manipulated, andthebarriers youcanerect tostop being victims.
The book focuses mainly onthenon-technical methods that hostile
intruders use to steal information, compromise the integrity of information
that is believed to be safe but isn't., or destroy company work product. 

Mytask ismade more difficult byasimple truth: Every reader will have
been manipulated bythegrand experts ofalltime insocial engineering -
their parents. They found ways to get you - "for your own good" - to do  
 

what they thought best. Parents become great storytellers inthesame way
thatsocial engineers skillfully develop very plausible stories, reasons, and
justifications forachieving their goals. Yes, wewere allmolded byour
parents: benevolent (and sometimes not so benevolent) social engineers. 
Conditioned bythattraining, wehave become vulnerable tomanipulation.
We would live adifficult lifeifwehad tobealways onourguard,
mistrustful ofothers, concerned that wemight become thedupe of
someone trying totake advantage ofus.Inaperfect world wewould
implicitly trust others, confident thatthepeople weencounter aregoing to
behonest andtrustworthy. Butwedonotliveinaperfect world, andso
wehave toexercise astandard ofvigilance torepel thedeceptive efforts
of our adversaries. 
Themain portions ofthisbook, Parts 2and3,aremade upofstories that
show you social engineers in action. In these sections you'll read about:  
• What phone phreaks discovered years ago: Aslick method forgetting
an unlisted phone number from the telephone company. 
• Several different methods used byattackers toconvince even alert,
suspicious employees toreveal their computer usernames and
passwords.   
• How anOperations Center manager cooperated inallowing anattacker
to steal his company's most secret product information. 
• The methods ofanattacker who deceived alady into downloading
software that spies onevery keystroke shemakes and emails the
details to him. 
• How private investigators get information about your company, and
about you personally, that I can practically guarantee will send a chill
up your spine.  
You might think asyou read some ofthestories inParts 2and3that
they're notpossible, thatnoonecould really succeed ingetting away with
thelies, dirty tricks, andschemes de,scribed inthese pages. Thereality is
that inevery case, these stories depict events that canand dohappen;
many ofthem arehappening every daysomewhere ontheplanet, maybe
even to your business as you read this book. 

The material inthis book will beareal eye-opener when itcomes to
protecting your business, butalso personally deflecting theadvances ofa
social engineer to protect the integrity of information in your private life.
InPart 4ofthisbook Iswitch gears. Mygoal here istohelp youcreate
thenecessary business policies andawareness training tominimize the
chances ofyour employees ever being duped byasocial engineer.
Understanding thestrategies, methods, andtactics ofthesocial engineer
will help prepare youtodeploy reasonable controls tosafeguard your IT
assets, without undermining your company's productivity.
Inshort, I'vewritten thisbook toraise your awareness about theserious
threat posed bysocial engineering, andtohelp youmake sure thatyour
company and its employees are less likely to be exploited in this way.
Or perhaps I should say, far less likely to be exploited ever again.
 

Part 2
The Art Of The Attacker

Chapter 2
When Innocuous Information Isn't 
What do most people think is the real threat from social engineers? What
should you do to be on your guard?
If the goal is to capture some highly valuable prize--say, a vital
component of the company's intellectual capital - then perhaps what's
needed is, figuratively,  just a stronger vault and more heavily armed
guards. Right? 
But in reality penetrating a company's security often starts with the bad
guy obtaining some piece of information or some document that seems so
innocent, so everyday and unimportant, that most people in the
organization wouldn't  see any reason why the item should be protected
and restricted
HIDDEN VALUE OF INFORMATION 
Much of the seemingly innocuous information in a company's possession
is prized
by a social engineering attacker because it can play a vital role in his
effort to dress himself in a cloak of believability. 
Throughout these pages, I'm going to show you how social engineers do
what they do by letting you "witness" the attacks for yourself--sometimes
presenting the action from the viewpoint of the people being victimized,
allowing you to put yourself in their shoes and gauge how you yourself
(or maybe one of your employees or co-workers) might have responded.
In many cases you'll also experience the same events from the perspective
of the social engineer. 
The first story looks at a vulnerability in the financial industry.  
 

CREDITCHEX 
Foralong time, theBritish putupwith avery stuffy banking system. As
anordinary, upstanding citizen, you couldn't walk inoffthestreet and
open abank account. No,thebank wouldn't consider accepting youasa
customer unless some person already well established asacustomer
provided you with a letter of recommendation.
Quite adifference, ofcourse, intheseemingly egalitarian banking
world oftoday. And ourmodern ease ofdoing business isnowhere more
inevidence than infriendly, democratic America, where almost anyone
canwalk intoabank andeasily open achecking account, right? Well, not
exactly. The truth isthatbanks understandably have anatural reluctance
toopen. anaccount forsomebody who just might have ahistory of
writing badchecks--that would beabout aswelcome asarapsheet of
bank robbery orembezzlement charges. Soit'sstandard practice atmany
banks togetaquick thumbs-up orthumbs-down onaprospective new
customer.  
One ofthemajor companies thatbanks contract with forthisinformation
isanoutfit we'll callCreditChex. They provide avaluable service totheir
clients, butlikemany companies, canalso unknowingly provide ahandy
service to knowing social engineers. 
The First Call: Kim Andrews
"National Bank, this is Kim. Did you want to open an account today?" 
"Hi, Kim. I have a question for you. Do you guys use CreditChex?" 
"Yes." 
"When you phone in to CreditChex, what do you call the number you give
them--is it a 'Merchant ID'?"  
A pause; she was weighing the question, wondering what this was about
and whether she should answer. 
The caller quickly continued without missing a beat:
"Because, Kim, I'm working on a book. It deals with private
investigations." 
"Yes," she said, answering the question with new confidence, pleased to
be helping a writer. 

"So it's called a Merchant ID, right?" 
"Uh huh."  
 

"Okay, great. Because I wanted to male sure I had the lingo right. For the
book. Thanks for your help. Good-bye, Kim." 
The Second Call: Chris Talbert
"National Bank, New Accounts, this is Chris." 
"Hi, Chris. This isAlex," thecaller said. "I'm acustomer service rep
with CreditChex. We're doing asurvey toimprove ourservices. Can you
spare me a couple of minutes?" 
She was glad to, and the caller went on: 
"Okay - what are the hours your branch is open for business?" She
answered, and continued answering his string of questions. 
"How many employees at your branch use our service?" 
"How often do you call us with an inquiry?" 
"Which of our 800-numbers have we assigned you for calling us?" 
"Have our representatives always been courteous?" 
"How's our response time?" 
"How long have you been with the bank?" 
"What Merchant ID are you currently using?" 
"Have you ever found any inaccuracies with the information we've
provided you?" 
"If you had any suggestions for improving our service, what would they
be?" 
And: 
"Would you be willing to fill out periodic questionnaires if we send them
to your branch?" 
She agreed, they chatted a bit, the caller rang off, and Chris went back to
work. 
The Third Call: Henry McKinsey
"CreditChex, this is Henry McKinsey, how can I help you?"  
Thecaller said hewasfrom National Bank. Hegave theproper Merchant
IDandthen gave thename andsocial security number oftheperson he

was looking forinformation on.Henry asked forthebirth date, andthe
caller gave that, too. 
 

After a few moments, Henry read the listing from his computer screen. 
"Wells Fargo reported NSF in 1998, one time, amount of $2,066." NSF –
non sufficient funds - is the familiar banking lingo for checks that have
been written when there isn't enough money in the account to cover them. 
"Any activities since then?" 
"No activities." 
"Have there been any other inquiries?" 
"Let's see. Okay, two of them, both last month. Third United Credit Union
of Chicago." He stumbled over the next name, Schenectady Mutual
Investments, and had to spell it. "That's in New York State," he added.  
Private Investigator at Work 
Allthree ofthose calls were made bythesame person: aprivate
investigator we'll callOscar Grace. Grace hadanew client, oneofhis
first. Acopuntil afewmonths before, hefound that some ofthisnew
work came naturally, butsome offered achallenge tohisresources and
inventiveness. This one came down firmly in the challenge category. 
The hardboiled private eyes offiction -theSam Spades andthePhilip
Marlowes -spend long night time hours sitting incars waiting tocatch a
cheating spouse. Real-life PIsdothesame. They also doaless written
about, butnoless important kind ofsnooping forwarring spouses, a
method that leans more heavily onsocial engineering skills than on
fighting off the boredom of night time vigils. 
Grace's new client was alady who looked asifshe had apretty
comfortable budget forclothes andjewelry. She walked into hisoffice
onedayandtook aseatintheleather chair, theonly onethatdidn't have
papers piled onit.Shesettled herlarge Gucci handbag onhisdesk with
thelogo turned toface him andannounced shewas planning totellher
husband that shewanted adivorce, butadmitted to"just avery little
problem." 
Itseemed herhubby was onestep ahead. Hehadalready pulled thecash
outoftheir savings account andaneven larger sum from their brokerage
account. Shewanted toknow where their assets hadbeen squirreled away,
andherdivorce lawyer wasn't anyhelp atall.Grace surmised thelawyer
wasoneofthose uptown, high-rise counselors who wouldn't gethishands
dirty on something messy like where did the money go. 

Could Grace help?  

Heassured heritwould beabreeze, quoted afee,expenses billed atcost,
and collected a check for the first payment. 
Then hefaced hisproblem. What doyou doifyou've never handled a
piece ofwork like this before and don't quite know how togoabout
tracking down amoney trail? You move forward bybaby steps. Here,
accord- mg to our source, is Grace's story. 
I knew about CreditChex and how banks used the outfit - my ex-wife used
towork atabank. ButIdidn't know thelingo andprocedures, andtrying
to ask my ex- would be a waste of time. 
Step one: Gettheterminology straight andfigure outhow tomake the
request soitsounds like Iknow what I'mtalking about. Atthebank I
called, thefirst young lady, Kim, wassuspicious when Iasked about how
they identify themselves when they phone CreditChex. Shehesitated; she
didn't know whether totellme.Was Iputoffbythat? Notabit.Infact,
thehesitation gave meanimportant clue, asign that Ihadtosupply a
reason she'd find believable. When Iworked thecononherabout doing
research forabook, itrelieved hersuspicions. You sayyou're anauthor or
a movie writer, and everybody opens up.  
She had other knowledge that would have helped -things like what
reformation CreditChex requires toidentify theperson you're calling
about, what information youcanaskfor,andthebigone, what wasKim's
bank Merchant IDnumber. Iwas ready toaskthose questions, buther
hesitation sent uptheredflag. Shebought thebook research story, butshe
already hadafew niggling suspicions. Ifshe'd been more willing right
way, I would have asked her to reveal more details about their procedures.
LINGO  
MARK: The victim of a con.  
BURN THE SOURCE: An attacker is said to have burned the source
when he allows a victim to recognize that an attack has taken place. Once
the victim becomes aware and notifies other employees or management of
the attempt, it becomes extremely difficult to exploit the same source in
future attacks.

You have togoongutinstinct, listen closely towhat themark issaying
andhow she's saying it.This lady sounded smart enough foralarm bells
tostart going offifIasked toomany unusual questions. And even though
she didn't know who I was or what number I was calling from, still in this 
 

business you never want anybody putting out the word to be on the look
out for someone calling to get information about the business. That’s
because you don't want to burn the source - you may want to call same
office back another time. 
I'm always on the watch for little signs that give me a read on how
cooperative a person is, on a scale that runs from "You sound like a nice
person and I believe everything you're saying" to "Call the cops, alert the
National Guard, this guy's up to no good." 
I read Kim as a little bit on edge, so I just called somebody at a different
branch. On my second call with Chris, the survey trick played like a
charm. The tactic here is to slip the important questions in among
inconsequential ones that are used to create a sense of believability.
Before I dropped the question about the Merchant ID number with
CreditChex, I ran a little last-minute test by asking her a personal question
about how long she'd been with the bank. 
A personal question is like a land mine - some people step right over it
and never notice; for other people, it blows up and sends them scurrying
for safety. So if I ask a personal question and she answers the question
and the tone of her voice doesn't change, that means she probably isn't
skeptical about the nature of the request. I can safely ask the sought after
question without arousing her suspicions, and she'll probably give me the
answer I'm looking for. 
One more thing a good PI knows: Never end the conversation after getting
the key information. Another two or three questions, a little chat, and then
it's okay to say good-bye. Later, if the victim remembers anything about
what you asked, it will probably be the last couple of questions. The rest
will usually be forgotten. 
So Chris gave me their Merchant ID number, and the phone number they
call to make requests. I would have been happier if I had gotten to ask
some questions about how much information you can get from
CreditChex. But it was better not to push my luck. 
It was like having a blank check on CreditChex. I could now call and get
information whenever I wanted. I didn't even have to pay for the service.
As it turned out, the CreditChex rep was happy to share exactly the

information I wanted: two places my client's husband had recently applied
to open an account. So where were the assets his soon-to-be ex-wife was
looking for? Where else but at the banking institutions the guy at
CreditChex listed? 
 

Analyzing the Con 
This entire ruse was based ononeofthefundamental tactics ofsocial
engineering: gaining access toinformation that acompany employee
treats as innocuous, when it isn't. 
Thefirst bank clerk confirmed theterminology todescribe theidentifying
number used when calling CreditChex: theMerchant ID.The second
provided thephone number forcalling CreditChex, and themost vital
piece ofinformation, thebank's Merchant IDnumber. Allthisinformation
appeared totheclerk tobeinnocuous. After all,thebank clerk thought
shewastalking tosomeone from CreditChex -sowhat could betheharm
in disclosing the number? 
Allofthislaidthegroundwork forthethird call. Grace hadeverything he
needed tophone CreditChex, pass himself offasarepfrom oneoftheir
customer banks, National, and simply askfortheinformation hewas
after. 
With asmuch skill atstealing information asagood swindler hasat
stealing your money, Grace hadwell-honed talents forreading people. He
knew thecommon tactic ofburying thekeyquestions among innocent
ones. Heknew apersonal question would test the second clerk's
willingness tocooperate, before innocently asking fortheMerchant ID
number. 
The first clerk's error in confirming the terminology for the CreditChex ID
number would bealmost impossible toprotect against. Theinformation is
sowidely known within thebanking industry that itappears tobe
unimportant -thevery model oftheinnocuous. But thesecond clerk,
Chris, should nothave been sowilling toanswer questions without
positively verifying thatthecaller was really who heclaimed tobe.She
should, atthevery least, have taken hisname and number and called
back; thatway, ifanyquestions arose later, shemay have kept arecord of
what phone number theperson hadused. Inthiscase, making acalllike
that would have made itmuch more difficult forthe attacker to
masquerade as a representative from CreditChex. 
MITNICK MESSAGE
AMerchant IDinthis situation isanalogous toapassword. Ifbank
personnel treated itlikeanATM PIN, they might appreciate thesensitive

nature oftheinformation. Isthere aninternal code ornumber inyour
organization that people aren't treating with enough care? 

Better still would have been a call to CreditChex using a nun bank already
had on record - not a number provided by the caller – to verify that the
person really worked there, and that the company was really doing a
customer survey. Given the practicalities of the real world and the time
pressures that most people work under today, though, this kind of
verification phone call is a lot to expect, except when an employee is
suspicious that some kind of attack is being made. 
THE ENGINEER TRAP 
It is widely known that head-hunter firms use social engineering to recruit
corporate talent. Here's an example of how it can happen. 
Inthelate1990s, anotvery ethical employment agency signed anew
client, acompany looking forelectrical engineers with experience inthe
telephone industry. Thehoncho ontheproject wasalady endowed with a
throaty voice and sexy manner that shehad learned tousetodevelop
initial trust and rapport over the phone. 
The lady decided tostage araid onacellular phone service provider to
seeifshecould locate some engineers who might betempted towalk
across the street to a competitor. She couldn't exactly call the switch board
and say, "Let me talk toanybody with five years ofengineering
experience." Instead, forreasons thatwillbecome clear inamoment, she
began thetalent assault byseeking apiece ofinformation thatappeared to
have nosensitivity atall,information that company people give outto
almost anybody who asks. 
The First Call: The receptionist
The attacker, using thename Didi Sands, placed acalltothecorporate
offices ofthecellular phone service. Inpart, theconversation went like
this: 
Receptionist: Good afternoon. This is Marie, how may I help you? 
Didi: Can you connect me to the Transportation Department? 
R: I'm not sure if we have one, I'll look in my directory. Who's calling? 
D:  It's Didi. 
R:  Are you in the building, or... ? 
D:  No, I'm outside the building. 
 

R:   Didi who? 
D: Didi Sands. Ihadtheextension forTransportation, butIforgot what
it was. 
R:   One moment. 
Toallay suspicions, atthis point Didi asked acasual, just making
conversation question designed toestablish thatshewas onthe"inside,"
familiar with company locations. 
D:  What building are you in - Lakeview or Main Place? 
R:   Main Place. (pause) It's 805 555 6469. 
Toprovide herself with abackup incase thecalltoTransportation didn't
provide what shewas looking for,Didi said shealso wanted totalk to
Real Estate. The receptionist gave herthat number, aswell. When Didi
asked tobeconnected totheTransportation number, thereceptionist tried,
but the line was busy. 
Atthat point Didi asked forathird phone number, forAccounts
Receivable, located atacorporate facility inAustin, Texas. The
receptionist asked hertowait amoment, andwent offtheline. Reporting
toSecurity that shehadasuspicious phone calland thought there was
something fishy going on?Notatall,andDidi didn't have theleast bitof
concern. Shewasbeing abitofanuisance, buttothereceptionist itwas
allpartofatypical workday. After about aminute, thereceptionist came
back ontheline, looked uptheAccounts Receivable number, tried it,and
put Didi through. 
The Second Call: Peggy
The next conversation went like this: 
Peggy: Accounts Receivable, Peggy. 
Didi:    Hi, Peggy. This is Didi, in Thousand Oaks. 
P:   Hi, Didi. 
D:  How ya doing? 
P:   Fine. 
Didi then used afamiliar term inthecorporate world thatdescribes the
charge code forassigning expenses against thebudget ofaspecific
organization or workgroup: 

D:Excellent. Ihave aquestion foryou. How doIfind outthecostcenter
for a particular department? 
P:   You'd have to get a hold of the budget analyst for the department. 

D:     Do you know who'd be the budget analyst
for Thousand Oaks - headquarters? I'm trying to
fill out a form and I don't know the proper cost
center. 
P: Ijustknow when y'all need acost center number, you callyour
budget analyst. 
D:     Do you have a cost center for your department there in   Texas? 
P: Wehave ourown costcenter butthey don't give usacomplete listof
them. 
D: How many digits isthecost center? FOr example, what's your cost
center? 
P:     Well, like, are you with 9WC or with SAT? 
Didi had no idea what departments or groups these referred to, but it
didn't matter. She answered: 
D:     9WC. 
P:     Then it's usually four digits. Who did you say you were with? 
D:     Headquarters--Thousand Oaks. 
P: Well, here's oneforThousand Oaks. It's1A5N, that's Nlike in
Nancy. 
By just hanging out long enough with somebody willing to be helpful,
Didi had the cost center number she needed - one of those pieces of
information that no one thinks to protect because it seems like something
that couldn't be of any value to an outsider. 
The Third Call: A Helpful Wrong Number  
Didi's next step would be to parlay the cost center number into something
of real value by using it as a poker chip. 
She began bycalling theReal Estate department, pretending shehad
reached awrong number. Starting with a"Sorry tobother you, but...."
sheclaimed shewas anemployee who hadlosthercompany directory,
andasked who youwere supposed tocalltogetanew copy. Theman said
theprint copy was outofdate because itwas available onthecompany
intranet site. 

Didi said shepreferred using ahard copy, andtheman told hertocall
Publications, andthen, without being asked -maybe justtokeep thesexy-
sounding lady onthephone alittle longer -helpfully looked upthe
number and gave it to her. 
 

The Fourth Call: Bart in Publications
InPublications, shespoke with aman named Bart. Didi said shewasfrom
Thousand Oaks, andthey hadanew consultant who needed acopy ofthe
company directory. Shetold him aprint copy would work better forthe
consultant, even ifitwassomewhat outofdate. Bart toldhershe'd have to
fill out a requisition form and send the form over to him.
Didi said shewas outofforms anditwas arush, andcould Bart bea
sweetheart andfillouttheform forher? Heagreed with alittle toomuch
enthusiasm, andDidi gave himthedetails. Fortheaddress ofthefictional
contractor, shedrawled thenumber ofwhat social engineers callamail
drop,inthiscase aMail Boxes Etc.-type ofcommercial business where
her company rented boxes for situations just like this.
The earlier spadework now came inhandy: There would beacharge for
thecost andshipping ofthedirectory. Fine -Didi gave thecost center for
Thousand Oaks:
"IA5N, that's N like in Nancy."
Afewdays later, when thecorporate directory arrived, Didi found itwas
aneven bigger payoff than shehadexpected: Itnotonly listed thenames
and phone numbers, butalso showed who worked forwhom -the
corporate structure of the whole organization.
The lady of the husky voice was ready to start making her head-hunter,
people-raiding phone calls. She had conned the information she needed to
launch her raid using the gift of gab honed to a high polish by every
skilled social engineer. Now she was ready for the payoff.
LINGO
MAIL DROP: The social engineer’s term for a rental mailbox, typically
rented under an assumed name, which is used to deliver documents or
packages the victim has been duped into sending
MITNICK MESSAGE
Just like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, each piece of information may be
irrelevant by itself. However, when the pieces are put together, a clear
picture emerges. In this I case, the picture the social engineer saw was the
entire internal structure of the company .

Analyzing the Con
Inthissocial engineering attack, Didi started bygetting phone numbers
forthree departments inthetarget company. This was easy, because the
numbers shewas asking forwere nosecret, especially toemployees. A
social engineer learns to sound like an insider, and Didi was skilled at this

game. One ofthephone numbers ledhertoacost center number, which
she then used to obtain a copy of the firm's employee directory. 
The main tools she needed: sounding friendly, using some corporate
lingo, and, with the last victim, throwing in a little verbal eyelash-batting. 
And one more tool, an essential element not easily acquired - the
manipulative skills of the social engineer, refined through extensive
practice and the unwritten lessons of bygone generations of confidence
men.
MORE "WORTHLESS" INFO 
Besides acost center number andinternal phone extensions, what other
seemingly useless information can be extremely valuable to your enemy?.
Peter Abel’s Phone Call
"Hi," the voice at the other end of the line says. "This is Tom at Parkhurst
Travel. Your tickets to San Francisco are ready. Do you want us to deliver
them, or do you want to pick them up?" 
"San Francisco?" Peter says. "I'm not going to San Francisco." "Is this
Peter Abels?" 
"Yes, but I don't have any trips coming up." 
"Well," the caller says with a friendly laugh, "you sure you don't want to
go to San Francisco?" 
"If you think you can talk my boss into it..." Peter says, playing along
with the friendly conversation. 
"Sounds likeamix-up," thecaller says. "On oursystem, webook travel
arrangements under theemployee number. Maybe somebody used the
wrong number. What's your employee number?" 
Peter obligingly recites hisnumber. And why not? Itgoes onjustabout
every personnel form hefills out, lots ofpeople inthecompany have
access toit-human resources, payroll, and, obviously, theoutside travel
agency. Noonetreats anemployee number likesome sortofsecret. What
difference could it make? 
 

The answer isn't hard tofigure out. Two orthree pieces ofinformation
might beallittakes tomount aneffective impersonation -thesocial
engineer cloaking himself insomeone else's identity. Get hold ofan
employee's name, hisphone number, hisemployee number--and maybe,
forgood measure, hismanager's name andphone number--and ahalfway-
competent social engineer isequipped with most ofwhat he's likely to
need to sound authentic to the next target he calls. 
Ifsomeone who said hewas from another department inyour company
had called yesterday, given aplausible reason, and asked foryour
employee number, would you have had any reluctance in giving it to him?
And by the way, what is your social security number? 
MITNICK MESSAGE
Themoral ofthestory is,don't give outanypersonal orinternal company
information oridentifiers toanyone, unless his orher voice is
recognizable and the requestor has a need to know. 
PREVENTING THE CON 
Your company hasaresponsibility tomake employees aware ofhow a
serious mistake canoccur from mishandling non public information. A
well thought-out information security policy, combined with proper
education and training, will dramatically increase employee awareness
about theproper handling ofcorporate business information. Adata
classification policy will help you toimplement proper controls with
respect todisclosing information. Without adata classification policy, all
internal information must beconsidered confidential, unless otherwise
specified. 
Take these steps toprotect your company from therelease ofseemingly
innocuous information: 
The Information Security Department needs to conduct awareness training
detailing themethods used bysocial engineers. One method, asdescribed
above, istoobtain seemingly non sensitive information anduseitasa
poker chip togain short-term trust. Each andevery employee needs tobe
aware thatwhen acaller hasknowledge about company procedures, lingo,
andinternal identifiers itdoes notinanyway, shape, orform authenticate
therequestor orauthorize him orherashaving aneed toknow. Acaller
could be a former employee or 

contractor with therequisite insider information. Accordingly, each
corporation has aresponsibility todetermine the appropriate
authentication method tobeused when employees interact with people
they don't recognize in person or over the telephone.
The person or persons with the role and responsibility of drafting a data
classification policy should examine the types of details that may be used
to gain access for legitimate employees that seem innocuous, but could
lead to information that is, sensitive. Though you'd never give out the
access codes for your ATM card, would you tell somebody what server
you use to develop company software products? Could that information
be used by a person pretending to be somebody who has legitimate access
to the corporate network?
Sometimes justknowing inside terminology canmake thesocial engineer
appear authoritative andknowledgeable. The attacker often relies onthis
common misconception todupe hisorhervictims into compliance. For
example, aMerchant IDisanidentifier thatpeople intheNew Accounts
department ofabank casually useevery day. But such anidentifier
exactly thesame asapassword. Ifeach andevery employee understands
thenature ofthisidentifier -that itisused topositively authenticate a
requestor--they might treat it with more respect.
MITNICK MESSAGE
Astheoldadage goes -even realparanoids probably have enemies. We
must assume thatevery business hasitsenemies, too-attackers thattarget
thenetwork infrastructure tocompromise business secrets. Don't endup
being astatistic oncomputer crime -it'shigh time toshore upthe
necessary defenses byimplementing proper controls through well-
thought-out security policies and procedures.
Nocompanies -well, very few, atleast -give outthedirect dialphone
numbers oftheir CEO orboard chairman. Most companies, though, have
noconcern about giving outphone numbers tomost departments and
workgroups inthe, organization -especially tosomeone who is,or
appears tobe,anemployee. Apossible countermeasure: Implement a
policy
 

that prohibits giving internal phone numbers ofemployees, contractors,
consultants, andtemps tooutsiders. More importantly, develop astep-by-
step procedure topositively identify whether acaller asking forphone
numbers is really an employee.
Accounting codes forworkgroups anddepartments, aswell ascopies of
thecorporate directory (whether hard copy, data file, orelectronic phone
book ontheintranet) arefrequent targets ofsocial engineers. Every
company needs awritten, well-publicized policy ondisclosure ofthistype
ofinformation. The safeguards should include maintaining anaudit log
that records instances when sensitive information isdisclosed topeople
outside of the company.
Information such asanemployee number, byitself, should notbeused as
anysortofauthentication. Every employee must betrained toverify not
just the identity of a requestor, but also the requestor's need to know.
Inyour security training, consider teaching employees this approach:
Whenever asked aquestion orasked forafavor byastranger, learn first
topolitely decline until therequest canbeverified. Then -before giving
intothenatural desire tobeMr.orMs.Helpful -follow company policies
andprocedures with respect toverification anddisclosure ofnon public
information. This style may goagainst our natural tendency tohelp
others, butalittle healthy paranoia may benecessary toavoid being the
social engineer's next dupe.
Asthe stories inthis chapter have shown, seemingly innocuous
information can be the key to your company's most prized secrets.

Chapter 3
The Direct Attack: Just Asking for It
Many social engineering attacks areintricate, involving anumber ofsteps
and elaborate planning, combining amix ofmanipulation and
technological know-how.
But Ialways find itstriking that askillful social engineer can often
achieve hisgoal with asimple, straightforward, direct attack. Just asking
outright for the information may be all that's needed - as you'll see.
AN MLAC QUICKIE
Want toknow someone's unlisted phone number? Asocial engineer can
tellyou half adozen ways (and you'll find some ofthem described in
other stories inthese pages), butprobably thesimplest scenario isonethat
uses a single phone call, like this one.
Number, Please
The attacker dialed the private phone company number for the MLAC, the
Mechanized Line Assignment Center. Tothewoman who answered, he
said:
"Hey, thisisPaul Anthony. I'macable splicer. Listen, aterminal boxout
here gotfried inafire. Cops think some creep tried toburn hisown house
down fortheinsurance. They gotmeouthere alone trying torewire this
entire twohundred-pair terminal. Icould really usesome help right now.
What facilities should be working at 6723 South Main?"

In other parts of the phone company, the person called would know that
reverse lookup information on non pub (non published) numbers is
supposed to be given out only to authorized phone company MLAC is
supposed to be known only to company employees. And while they'd
never give out information to the public, who would want to refuse a little
help to a company man coping with that heavy-duty assignment?.  She
feels sorry for him, she's had bad days on the job herself, and she’ll
bend the rules a little to help out a fellow employee with a problem. She
gives him the cable and pairs and each working number assigned to the
address. 
MITNICK MESSAGE
It's human nature to trust our fellow man, especially when the request
meets the test of being reasonable. Social engineers use this knowledge to
exploit their victims and to achieve their goals.
Analyzing the Con 
As you'll notice repeatedly in these stories, knowledge of a company’s
lingo, and of its corporate structure - its various offices and departments
what each does and what information each has - is part of the essential
bag of tricks of the successful social engineer. 
 
YOUNG MAN ON THE RUN 
A man we'll call Frank Parsons had been on the run for years, still wanted
by the federal government for being part of an underground antiwar group
in the 1960s. In restaurants he sat facing the door and he had a way of
glancing over his shoulder every once in a while that other people found
disconcerting. He moved every few years. 
At one point Frank landed in a city he didn't know, and set about job
hunting. For someone like Frank, with his well-developed computer skills
(and social engineering skills as well, even ,though he never listed those
on a job application), finding a good job usually wasn't a problem. Except
in times when the economy is very tight, people with good technical
computer knowledge usually find their talents in high demand and they
have little problem landing on their feet. Frank quickly located a well –

paying job opportunity at a large, upscale, long-term care facility near
where he was living.
 

 
Justtheticket, hethought. Butwhen hestarted plodding hisway through
theapplication forms, hecame upon anuh-oh: Theemployer required the
applicant toprovide acopy ofhisstate criminal history record, which he
had toobtain himself from thestate police. The stack ofemployment
papers included aform torequest thisdocument, andtheform hadalittle
boxforproviding afingerprint. Even though they were asking foraprint
ofjusttheright index finger, ifthey matched hisprint with oneinthe
FBI's database, he'd probably soon beworking infood service ata
federally funded resort. 
Ontheother hand, itoccurred toFrank thatmaybe, justmaybe, hemight
still beable togetaway with this. Perhaps thestate didn't send those
fingerprint samples to the FBI at all. How could he find out? 
How? Hewas asocial engineer--how doyou think hefound out? He
placed aphone calltothestate patrol: "Hi. We're doing astudy forthe
State Department ofJustice. We're researching the requirements to
implement anew fingerprint identification system. Can Italk to
somebody there that's really familiar with what you're doing who could
maybe help us out?" 
And when thelocal expert came onthephone, Frank asked aseries of
questions about what systems they were using, and thecapabilities to
search andstore fingerprint data. Had they hadanyequipment problems?
Were they tied into theNational Crime Information Center's (NCIC)
Fingerprint Search orjustwithin thestate? Was theequipment pretty easy
for everybody to learn to use? 
Slyly, he sneaked the key question in among the rest. 
The answer was music tohisears: Nothey weren't tied into theNCIC,
they only checked against the state's Criminal Information Index (CII). 
MITNICK MESSGAE
Savvy information swindlers have noqualms about ringing upfederal,
state, orlocal government officials tolearn about theprocedures oflaw
enforcement. With such information inhand, thesocial engineer may be
able to circumvent your company's standard security checks. 
 

That was allFrank needed toknow. Hedidn't have anyrecord inthat
state, sohesubmitted hisapplication, was hired forthejob, andnobody
ever showed upathisdesk onedaywith thegreeting, "These gentlemen,
are from the FBI and they'd like to have a little talk with you." 
And, according to him, he proved to be a model employee. 
ON THE DOORSTEP 
Inspite ofthemyth ofthepaperless office, companies continue toprint
outreams ofpaper every day. Information inprint atyour company may
bevulnerable, even ifyou use security precautions and stamp it
confidential. 
Here's onestory thatshows youhow social engineers might obtain your
most secret documents. 
Loop-Around Deception 
Every year thephone company publishes avolume called theTest
Number Directory (oratleast they used to,and because Iamstill on
supervised release, I'mnotgoing toaskifthey still do). This document
was highly prized byphone phreaks because itwas packed with alistof
alltheclosely guarded phone numbers used bycompany craftsmen,
technicians, aothers forthings liketrunk testing orchecking numbers that
always ring busy. 
One of these test numbers, known in the lingo as a loop-around, was
particularly useful. Phone phreaks used it as a way to find other phone
phreaks to chat with, at no cost to them. Phone phreaks also used it a way
to create a call back number to give to, say, a bank. A social engineer
would tell somebody at the bank the phone number to call to reach at his
office. When the bank called back to the test number (loop-around) the
phone phreak would be able to receive the call, yet he had the protection
of having used a phone number that could not be traced back to him. 
A Test Number Directory provided a lot of neat information that could be
used by any information-hungry, testosteroned, phone phreak. So when
the new directories were published each year, they were coveted by a lot
of youngsters whose hobby was exploring the telephone network. 
 

MITNICK MESSAGE
Security training with respect tocompany policy designed toprotect
information assets needs tobeforeveryone inthecompany, notjustany
employee who haselectronic orphysical access tothecompany's IT
assets. 
Stevie’s Scam 
Naturally phone companies don't make these books easy to get hold of, so
phone phreaks have to be creative to get one. How can they do this? An
eager youngster with a mind bent on acquiring the directory might enact a
scenario like this. 
Late oneday, amild evening inthesouthern California autumn, aguyI'll
callhimStevie phones asmall telephone company central office, which is
thebuilding from which phone lines runtoallthehomes andbusinesses
in the established service area. 
When theswitchman onduty answers thecall, Stevie announces thathe's
from thedivision ofthephone company that publishes and distributes
printed materials. "We have your new Test Number Directory," hesays.
"But forsecurity reasons, wecant deliver your copy until wepick upthe
oldone. And thedelivery guy isrunning late. Ifyou wanna leave your
copy justoutside your door, hecanswing by,pick upyours, drop thenew
one and be on his way." 
The unsuspecting switchman seems tothink that sounds reasonable. He
does exactly asasked, putting outonthedoorstep ofthebuilding hiscopy
ofthedirectory, itscover clearly marked inbigredletters with the
"COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL -WHEN NO LONGER NEEDED
THIS DOCUMENT MUST BE SHREDDED." 
Stevie drives byandlooks around carefully tospot anycops orphone
company security people who might belurking behind trees orwatching
forhim from parked cars. Nobody insight. Hecasually picks upthe
coveted directory and drives away.
Here's justonemore example ofhow easy itcanbeforasocial engineer
to get what he wants by following the simple principle of "just ask for it." 
 

GAS ATTACK
Not only company assets are at risk in a social engineering scenario.
Sometimes it's a company's customers who are the victims.
Working asacustomer-service clerk brings itsshare offrustrations, its
share oflaughs, anditsshare ofinnocent mistakes -some ofwhich can
have unhappy consequences for a company's customers.
Janie Acton's Story
Janie Acton had been manning acubicle asacustomer service repf
Hometown Electric Power, inWashington, D.C., forjustover three years.
She was considered to be one of the better clerks, smart and conscientious
Itwas Thanksgiving week when this one particular call came in.The
caller, said, "This isEduardo intheBilling Department. I'vegotalady on
hold, she's asecretary intheexecutive offices thatworks foroneofthe
vice presidents, andshe's asking forsome information andIcan't usemy
computer Igotanemail from this girlinHuman Resources that said
'ILOVEYOU.’ and when Iopened theattachment, Icouldn't usemy
machine any more. Avirus. Igotcaught byastupid virus. Anyways,
could you look up some customer information for me?"
"Sure," Janie answered. "It crashed your computer? That's terrible."
"Yeah."
"How can I help?" Janie asked.
Here theattacker called oninformation from hisadvance research to
make himself sound authentic. Hehadlearned that theinformation he,
wanted wasstored insomething called theCustomer Billing Information
System, andhehadfound outhow employees referred tothesystem. He
asked, "Can you bring up an account on CBIS?"
"Yes, what's the account number.? "
"I don't have the number; I need you to bring it up by name."
"Okay, what's the name?"
"It's Heather Marning." He spelled the name, and Janie typed it in.
"Okay, I have it up."
"Great. Is the account current?"
"Uh huh, it's current."
"What's the account number?" he asked.
"Do you have a pencil?"

 
"Ready to write." 
"Account number BAZ6573NR27Q." 
He read the number back and then said, "And what's the service
address?" 
She gave him the address. 
"And what's the phone?" 
Janie obligingly read off that information, too. 
Thecaller thanked her,said good-bye, andhung up.Janie went ontothe
next call, never thinking further about it. 
Art Sealy's Research Project 
ArtSealy hadgiven upworking asafreelance editor forsmall publishing
houses when hefound hecould make more money doing research for
writers andbusinesses. Hesoon figured outthatthefeehecould charge
went upinproportion tohow close theassignment took him tothe
sometimes hazy line between thelegal and theillegal. Without ever
realizing it,certainly without ever giving itaname, Artbecame asocial
engineer, using techniques familiar toevery information broker. He
turned outtohave anative talent forthebusiness, figuring outforhimself
techniques that most social engineers hadtolearn from others. After a
while, he crossed the line without the least twinge of guilt. 
Aman contacted mewho was writing abook about theCabinet inthe
Nixon years, andwas looking foraresearcher who could gettheinside
scoop onWilliam E.Simon, who hadbeen Nixon's Treasury secretary.
Mr.Simon haddied, buttheauthor hadthename ofawoman who had
been onhisstaff. Hewas pretty sure shestill lived inD.C., buthadn't
been able togetanaddress. Shedidn't have atelephone inhername, orat
least none thatwaslisted. Sothat's when hecalled me.Itoldhim, sure, no
problem. 
This isthekind ofjobyoucanusually bring offinaphone callortwo, if
youknow what you're doing. Every local utility company cangenerally
becounted ontogive theinformation away. Ofcourse, youhave toBSa
little. But what's a little white lie now and then - right? 
Iliketouseadifferent approach each time, justtokeep things interesting.
"This isso-and-so intheexecutive offices" hasalways worked well for

me. Sohas "I've got somebody onthe line from Vice President
Somebody's office," which worked this time, too. 

MITNICK MESSAGE
Never think allsocial engineering attacks need tobe
elaborate ruses socomplex that they're likely tobe
recognized before they canbecompleted. Some arein-and-
out, strike-and-disappear, very simple attacks that areno
more than.., well, just asking for it. 
You have tosortofdevelop thesocial engineer's instinct, getasense of
how cooperative theperson ontheother endisgoing tobewith you. This
time I lucked out with a friendly, helpful lady. In a single phone call, I had
the address and phone number. Mission accomplished. 
Analyzing the Con 
Certainly Janie knew that customer information is sensitive. She would 
never discuss one customer's account with another customer, or give out 
private information to the public. 
But naturally, for a caller from within the company, different rules apply. 
For a fellow employee it's all about being a team player and helping each 
other get the job done. The man from Billing could have looked up the 
details himself if his computer hadn't been down with a virus, and she was
glad to be able to help a co-worker. 
Art built up gradually to the key information he was really after, asking 
questions  along the way about things he didn't really need, such as the 
account number. Yet at the same time, the account number information 
provided a fallback: If the clerk had become suspicious, he'd call a
second 
time and stand a better chance of success, because knowing the account 
number would make him sound all the more authentic to the next clerk 
he reached. 
It never occurred to Janie that somebody might actually lie about some
thing  like this, that the caller might not really be from the billing
department 
at all. Of course, the blame doesn't lie at Janie's feet. She wasn't well 
versed in the rule about making sure you know who you're talking to 
before discussing information in a customer's file. Nobody had ever told 
her about the danger of a phone call like the one from Art. It wasn't in the

company policy, it wasn't part of her training, and her supervisor had 
never mentioned it. 
 

PREVENTING THE CON
Apoint toinclude inyour security training: Justbecause acaller orvisitor
knows thenames ofsome people inthecompany, orknows some ofthe
corporate lingo orprocedures, doesn't mean heiswho heclaims tobe.
And itdefinitely doesn't establish himasanybody authorized tobegiven
internal information, or access to your computer system or network.
Security training needs to emphasize: When in doubt, verify, verify,
verify.
In earlier times, access to information within a company was a mark of
rank andprivilege. Workers stoked thefurnaces, ranthemachines, typed
theletters, andfiled thereports. The foreman orboss told them what to
do,when, andhow. Itwas theforeman orboss who knew how many
widgets each worker should beproducing onashift, how many andin
what colors andsizes thefactory needed toturn outthisweek, next week,
and by the end of the month.
Workers handled machines andtools andmaterials, andbosses handled
information. Workers needed only theinformation specific totheir
specific jobs.
The picture is a little different today, isn't it? Many factory workers use
some form ofcomputer orcomputer-driven machine. Foralarge part of
theworkforce, critical information ispushed down totheusers' desktops
sothat they can fulfill their responsibility togettheir work done. In
today's environment, almost everything employees doinvolves the
handling of information.
That's why a company's security policy needs to be distributed enterprise-
wide, regardless ofposition. Everybody must understand thatit'snotjust
thebosses andexecutives who have theinformation thatanattacker might
beafter. Today, workers atevery level, even those who don't usea
computer, areliable tobetargeted. The newly hired repinthecustomer
service group may bejusttheweak link thatasocial engineer breaks to
achieve his objective.
Security training and corporate security policies need to strengthen that
link.

Chapter 4
Building Trust 
Some ofthese stories might lead youtothink thatIbelieve everyone in
business isacomplete idiot, ready, even eager, togive away every secret
inhisorherpossession. The social engineer knows isn't true. Why are
social engineering attacks sosuccessful? Itisn't because people arestupid
orlack common sense. Butwe,ashuman beings areallvulnerable to
being deceived because people canmisplace their trust ifmanipulated in
certain ways. 
The social engineer anticipates suspicion andresistance, andhe'salways
prepared toturndistrust intotrust. Agood social engineer plans hisattack
like a chess game, anticipating the questions his target might ask so he can
be ready with the proper answers. 
One ofhiscommon techniques involves building asense oftrust onthe
part ofhisvictims. How does aconman make youtrust him? Trust me,
he can.
TRUST: THE KEY TO DECEPTION 
The more a social engineer can make his contact seem like business as
usual, the more he allays suspicion. When people don't have a reason to
be suspicious, it's easy for a social engineer to gain their trust. 
Once he's got your trust, the drawbridge is lowered and the castle door
thrown open so he can enter and take whatever information he wants. 

NOTE
You may notice Irefer tosocial engineers, phone phreaks, andcon-
game operators as'he" through most ofthese stories. This isnot
chauvinism; itsimply reflects thetruth that most practitioners in
these fields aremale. Butthough there aren’t many women social
engineers, thenumber isgrowing. There areenough female social
engineers outthere that you shouldn’t letyour guard down just
because youhear awomen’s voice. Infact, female social engineers
have adistinct advantage because they canusetheir sexuality to
obtain cooperation. You’ll find asmall number oftheso-called
gentler sex represented in these pages
The First Call: Andrea Lopez
Andrea Lopez answered thephone atthevideo rental store where she
worked, and inamoment was smiling: It'salways apleasure when a
customer takes thetrouble tosayhe'shappy about theservice. This caller
said hehadhadavery good experience dealing with thestore, andhe
wanted to send the manager a letter about it. 
Heasked forthemanager's name andthemailing address, andshetold
himitwasTommy Allison, andgave himtheaddress. Ashewasabout to
hang up,hehadanother idea andsaid, "Imight want towrite toyour
company headquarters, too. What's your store number?" She gave him
thatinformation, aswell. Hesaid thanks, added something pleasant about
how helpful she had been, and said goodbye. 
"A call like that," she thought, "always seems to make the shift go by
faster. How nice it would be if people did that more often." 
The Second Call: Ginny
"Thanks for calling Studio Video. This is Ginny, how can I help you?" 
"Hi, Ginny," the caller said enthusiastically, sounding as if he talked to
Ginny every week or so. "It's Tommy Allison, manager at Forest Park,
Store 863. We have a customer in here who wants to rent Rocky 5 and
we're all out of copies. Can you check on what you've got?" 
She came back onthelineafter afewmoments andsaid, "Yeah, we've
got three copies." 
"Okay, I'll see if he wants to drive over there. Listen, thanks. If you ever
need any help from our store, just call and ask for Tommy. I'll be glad to
do whatever I can for you." 
 

Three orfour times over thenext couple ofweeks, Ginny gotcalls from
Tommy forhelp with one thing oranother. They were seemingly
legitimate requests, andhewas always very friendly without sounding
likehewastrying tocome ontoher.Hewasalittle chatty along theway,
aswell -"Did youhear about thebigfireinOak Park? Bunch ofstreets
closed over there," and thelike. The calls were alittle break from the
routine of the day, and Ginny was always glad to hear from him. 
One day Tommy called sounding stressed. He asked, "Have 
you guys been having trouble with your computers?" 
"No," Ginny answered. "Why?" 
"Some guy crashed his car into a telephone pole, and the phone company
repairman says a whole part of the city will lose their phones and Internet
connection till they get this fixed." 
"Oh, no. Was the man hurt?" 
"They took him away in an ambulance. Anyway, I could use a little help.
I've got a customer of yours here who wants to rent Godfather II and
doesn't have his card with him. Could you verify his information for me?"
"Yeah, sure." 
Tommy gave the customer's name and address, and Ginny 
found him in the computer. She gave Tommy the 
account number. 
"Any late returns or balance owed?" Tommy asked.
"Nothing showing." 
"Okay, great. I'll sign him up by hand for an account here and put it in our
database later on when the computers come back up again. And he wants
to put this charge on the Visa card he uses at your store, and he doesn't
have it with him. What's the card number and expiration date?" 
She gave ittohim, along with theexpiration date. Tommy said, "Hey,
thanks for the help. Talk to you soon," and hung up. 
Doyle Lonnegan's Story 
Lonnegan isnotayoung man youwould want tofind waiting when you
open your front door. Aone-time collection man forbadgambling debts,
hestilldoes anoccasional favor, ifitdoesn't puthim outvery much. In
this case, hewas offered asizable bundle ofcash forlittle more than
making 
 

some phone calls toavideo store. Sounds easy enough. It'sjustthatnone
ofhis"customers" knew how torunthiscon; they needed somebody with
Lonnegan's talent and know-how. 
People don't write checks to cover their bets when they're unlucky or
stupid 
at the poker table. Everybody knows that. Why did these friends of 
mine keep on playing with a cheat that didn't have green out on the table?
Don't ask. Maybe they're a little light in the IQ department. But they're 
friends of mine--what can you do? 
This guy didn't have the money, so they took a check. I ask you! Should 
of drove him to an ATM machine, is what they should of done. But no, 
a check. For $3,230. 
Naturally, it bounced. What would you expect? So then they call me; 
can I help? I don't close doors on people's knuckles any more. Besides, 
there are better ways nowadays. I told them, 30 percent commission, I'd 
see what I could do. So they give me his name and address, and I go up 
on the computer to see what's the closest video store to him. 
 I wasn't in a big hurry. Four phone calls to cozy up to the store manager, 
and then, bingo, I've got the cheat's Visa card number. 
 Another friend of mine owns a topless bar. For fifty bucks, he put the 
guy's poker money through as a Visa charge from the bar. Let the cheat 
 explain that to his wife. You think he might try to tell Visa it's not his 
charge? Think again. He knows we know who he is. And if we could get 
his Visa number, he'll figure we could get a lot more besides. No worries 
on that score. 
Analyzing the Con 
Tommy's initial calls toGinny were simply tobuild uptrust. When time
came fortheactual attack, sheletherguard down andaccepted Tommy
for who he claimed to be, the manager at another store in the chain. 
And why wouldn't sheaccept him--she already knew him. She'd only
methimover thetelephone, ofcourse, butthey hadestablished abusiness
friendship that isthebasis fortrust. Once shehadaccepted him asan
authority figure, amanager inthesame company, thetrust had been
established and the rest was a walk in the park. 
 

MITNICK MESSAGE
The sting technique ofbuilding trust isoneofthemost effective social
engineering tactics. You have to think whether you really know the person
you're talking to.Insome rareinstances, theperson might notbewho he
claims tobe.Accordingly, weallhave tolearn toobserve, think, and
question authority. 
VARIATION ON A THEME: CARD CAPTURE  
Building a sense of trust doesn't necessarily demand a series of phone
calls with the victim, as suggested by the previous story. I recall one
incident I witnessed where five minutes was all it took. 
Surprise, Dad 
Ionce satatatable inarestaurant with Henry andhisfather. Inthecourse
ofconversation, Henry scolded hisfather forgiving outhiscredit card
number asifitwere hisphone number. "Sure, youhave togive your card
number when youbuysomething," hesaid. "But giving ittoastore that
files your number in their records - that's real dumb." 
The only place I do that is at Studio Video," Mr. Conklin said, naming
 the same chain of video stores. "But I go over my Visa bill every month.
If they started running up charges, I'd know it. 
Sure," said Henry, "but once they have your number, it's so easy for 
somebody to steal it " 
You mean a crooked employee." 
No, anybody - not  just an employee." 
You're talking through your hat," Mr. Conklin said. 
I can call up right now and get them to tell me your Visa number," Henry
shot back. 
No, you can't,  "his father said. 
"I can do it in five minutes, right here in front of you without ever leaving
 the table." 
Mr. Conklin looked tight around the eyes, the look of somebody feeling
sure of himself, but not wanting to show it. "I say you don't know  that
you're talking about," he barked, taking out his wallet and slapping  fifty
dollar bill down on the table. "If you can do what you say, that's 
yours. 
 

"I don't want your money, Dad," Henry said. 
He pulled out his cell phone, asked his father which branch he used, and
called Directory Assistance for the phone number, as well as the number
of the store in nearby Sherman Oaks. 
He then called the Sherman Oaks store. Using pretty much the same
approach described in the previous story, he quickly got the manager's
name and the store number. 
Then he called the store where his father had an account. He pulled the 
old impersonate-the-manager trick, using the manager's name as his own 
and giving the store number he had just obtained. Then he used the same 
ruse: "Are your computers working okay? Ours have been up and down."
He listened to her reply and then said, "Well, look, I've got one of your 
customers here who wants to rent a video, but our computers are down 
right now. I need you to look up the customer account and make sure he's
a customer at your branch." 
Henry gave him his father's name. Then, using only a slight variation in 
technique, he made the request to read off the account information: 
address, phone number, and date the account was opened. And then he 
said, "Hey, listen, I'm holding up a long line of customers here. What's
the 
 credit card number and expiration date?" 
Henry  held the cell phone to his ear with one hand while he wrote on a 
paper napkin with the other. As he finished the call, he slid the napkin in 
front of his father, who stared at it with his mouth hanging open. The 
to poor guy looked totally shocked, as if his whole system of trust had
just 
gone down the drain. 
Analyzing the Con 
Think ofyour own attitude when somebody youdon't know asks youfor
something. Ifashabby stranger comes toyour door, you're notlikely to
lethim in;ifastranger comes toyour door nicely dressed, shoes shined,
hairperfect, with polite manner andasmile, you're likely tobemuch less
suspicious. Maybe he'sreally Jason from theFriday the13th movies, but
you're willing tostart outtrusting thatperson aslong ashelooks normal
and doesn't have a carving knife in his hand. 

What's less obvious isthat wejudge people onthetelephone thesame
way. Does thisperson sound likehe'strying tosellmesomething? Ishe
friendly andoutgoing ordoIsense some kind ofhostility orpressure?
Does heorshehave thespeech ofaneducated person? Wejudge these
things andperhaps adozen others unconsciously, inaflash, often inthe
first few moments of the conversation. 
 

MITNICK MESSAGE
It'shuman nature tothink thatit'sunlikely you're being deceived inany
particular transaction, atleast until you have some reason tobelieve
otherwise. Weweigh therisks andthen, most ofthetime, give people the
benefit ofthedoubt. That's thenatural behavior ofcivilized people.., at
least civilized people who have never been conned ormanipulated or
cheated out of a large amount of money.
Aschildren ourparents taught usnottotrust strangers. Maybe weshould
all heed this age-old principle in today's workplace.
Atwork, people make requests ofusallthetime. Doyouhave anemail
address forthis guy? Where's thelatest version ofthecustomer list?
Who's thesubcontractor onthispart oftheproject? Please send methe
latest project update. I need the new version of the source code.
And guess what: Sometimes people who make those requests arepeople
your don't personally know, folks who work forsome other part ofthe
company, orclaim they do.Butiftheinformation they give checks out,
andthey appear tobeintheknow ("Marianne said ...";"It's ontheK-16
server..."; "...revision 26ofthenew product plans"), weextend ourcircle
of trust to include them, and blithely give them what they're asking for.
Sure, wemay stumble alittle, asking ourselves "Why does somebody in
theDallas plant need toseethenew product plans?" or"Could ithurt
anything togive outthename oftheserver it'son?" Soweaskanother
question ortwo. Iftheanswers appear reasonable andtheperson's manner
isreassuring, weletdown ourguard, return toournatural inclination to
trust ourfellow man orwoman, and do(within reason) whatever itis
we're being asked to do.
And don't think foramoment thattheattacker willonly target people 'ho
usecompany computer systems. What about theguy inthemail room?
"Will you domeaquick favor? Drop thisinto theintra company mail
pouch?" Does themail room clerk know itcontains afloppy disk with a
special little program fortheCEO's secretary? Now thatattacker gets his
own personal copy oftheCEO's email. Wow! Could thatreally happen at
your company? The answer is, absolutely.
THE ONE-CENT CELL PHONE

Many people look around until the); find abetter deal; social engineers
don't look forabetter deal, they find away tomake adeal better. For
example, sometimes acompany launches amarketing campaign that's so
youcanhardly bear topass itup,while thesocial engineer looks atthe
offer and wonders how he can sweeten the deal.

Not long ago, anationwide wireless company had amajor promotion
underway offering abrand-new phone foronecent when yousigned up
for one of their calling plans. 
Aslots ofpeople have discovered toolate, there areagood many
questions aprudent shopper should askbefore signing upforacellphone
calling plan whether theservice isanalog, digital, oracombination; the
number ofanytime minutes you canuseinamonth; whether roaming
charges areincluded.., andon,andon.Especially important tounderstand
upfront isthecontract term ofcommitment--how many months oryears
will you have to commit to? 
Picture asocial engineer inPhiladelphia who isattracted byacheap
phone model offered byacellular phone company onsign-up, buthe
hates thecalling plan thatgoes with it.Notaproblem. Here's oneway he
might handle the situation. 
The First Call: Ted
First, the social engineer dials an electronics chain store on West Girard. 
"Electron City. This is Ted." 
"Hi, Ted. This is Adam. Listen, I was in a few nights ago talking to a
sales guy about a cell phone. I said I'd call him back when I decided on
the plan I wanted, and I forgot his name. Who's the guy who works in that
department on the night shift? 
"There's more than one. Was it William?" 
"I'm not sure. Maybe it was William. What's he look like?" "Tall guy.
Kind of skinny." 
"I think that's him. What's his last name, again? 
"Hadley. H--A--D--L--E-- Y." 
"Yeah, that sounds right. When's he going to be on?" 
"Don't know his schedule this week, but the evening people come in about
five." 
"Good. I'll try him this evening, then. Thanks, Ted." 
The Second Call: Katie
The next call is to a store of the same chain on North Broad Street. 
"Hi, Electron City. Katie speaking, how can I help you?" 
 

"Katie, hi. This is William Hadley, over at the West Girard store. How're
you today?" 
"Little slow, what's up?" 
"I've got a customer who came in for that one-cent cell phone program.
You know the one I mean?" 
"Right. I sold a couple of those last week." 
"You still have some of the phones that go with that plan?" 
"Got a stack of them." 
"Great. 'Cause Ijustsold onetoacustomer. The guy passed credit; we
signed him uponthecontract. Ichecked thedamned inventory andwe
don't have anyphones left. I'msoembarrassed. Can youdomeafavor?
I'llsend him over toyour store topick upaphone. Can yousellhim the
phone foronecent andwrite himupareceipt? And he'ssupposed tocall
meback once he's gotthephone soIcan talk him through how to
program it." 
"Yeah, sure. Send him over." 
"Okay. His name is Ted. Ted Yancy." 
When the guy who calls himself Ted Yancy shows up at the 
North Broad St. store, Katie writes up an invoice and sells him 
the cell phone for one cent, just as she had been asked to do 
by her "co worker." She fell for the con hook, line, and sinker. 
When it'stime topay, thecustomer doesn't have any pennies inhis
pocket, sohereaches intothelittle dish ofpennies atthecashier's counter,
takes oneout, andgives ittothegirlattheregister. Hegets thephone
without paying even the one cent for it. 
He's then freetogotoanother wireless company thatuses thesame model
ofphone, and choose any service plan helikes. Preferably one ona
month-to-month basis, with no commitment required. 
Analyzing the Con 
Itsnatural forpeople tohave ahigher degree ofacceptance foranyone
who claims tobeafellow employee, andwho knows company procedures
,dlingo. The social engineer inthis story took advantage ofthat by
finding out the details of a promotion, identifying himself as a company 
employee, and asking for a favor from another branch. This happens 
between branches of retail stores and between departments in a company,
people are physically separated and deal with fellow employees they have
never actually met day in and day out. 

HACKING INTO THE FEDS
People often don't stop tothink about what materials their organization is
making available ontheWeb. Formyweekly show onKFI Talk Radio in
Los Angeles, theproducer didasearch online andfound acopy ofan
instruction manual foraccessing-the database oftheNational Crime
Information Center. Later hefound theactual NCIC manual itself online,
asensitive document that gives allthe instructions for retrieving
information from the FBI's national crime database.
The manual isahandbook forlawenforcement agencies that gives the
formatting andcodes forretrieving information oncriminals andcrimes
from thenational database. Agencies allover thecountry cansearch the
same database forinformation tohelp solve crimes intheir own
jurisdiction. The manual contains thecodes used inthedatabase for
designating everything from different kinds oftattoos, todifferent boat
hulls, to denominations of stolen money and bonds.
Anybody with access tothemanual can look upthesyntax and the
commands toextract information from thenational database. Then,
following instructions from theprocedures guide, with alittle nerve,
anyone canextract information from thedatabase. Themanual also gives
phone numbers tocallforsupport inusing thesystem. You may have
similar manuals inyour company offering product codes orcodes for
retrieving sensitive information.
TheFBIalmost certainly hasnever discovered thattheir sensitive manual
andprocedural instructions areavailable toanyone online, andIdon't
think they'd bevery happy about itifthey knew. One copy wasposted by
agovernment department inOregon, theother byalaw enforcement
agency inTexas. Why? Ineach case, somebody probably thought the
information was ofnovalue andposting itcouldn't doanyharm. Maybe
somebody posted itontheir intranet justasaconvenience totheir own
employees, never realizing that itmade theinformation available to
everyone ontheInternet who hasaccess toagood search engine such as
Google -including thejust-plain-curious, thewannabe cop, thehacker,
and the organized crime boss.
Tapping into the System
The principle ofusing such information todupe someone inthe
government orabusiness setting isthesame: Because asocial engineer
knows how toaccess specific databases orapplications, orknows the

names ofacompany's computer servers, orthelike, hegains credibility.
Credibility leads to trust.
 

Once a social engineer has such codes, getting the information he needs 
isaneasy process. Inthisexample, hemight begin bycalling aclerk ina
local state police Teletype office, andasking aquestion about oneofthe
codes inthemanual -forexample, theoffense code. Hemight say
something like, "When IdoanOFF inquiry intheNCIC, I'mgetting a
"System isdown' error. Areyougetting thesame thing when youdoan
OFF? Would youtryitforme?" Ormaybe he'd sayhewastrying tolook
up a wpf - police  talk for a wanted person's file. 
The Teletype clerk on the other end of the phone would pick up the cue 
that thecaller was familiar with theoperating procedures and the
commands toquery theNCIC database. Who else other than someone
trained in using NCIC would know these procedures? 
After the clerk has confirmed that her system is working okay, the
conversation
 might go something like this:
"I could use a little help." "What're you looking for?" 
"I need you to do an OFF command on Reardon, Martin. DOB
10118/66." 
"What's the sosh?" (Law enforcement people sometimes refer to the 
social security number as the sosh.)  
"700-14-7435." 
After looking for the listing, she might come back with something like, 
"He's got a 2602." 
The attacker would only have to look at the NCIC on line to find the
meaning of the number: The man has a case of swindling on his record. 
Analyzing the Con 
Anaccomplished social engineer wouldn't stop foraminute toponder
ways ofbreaking intotheNCIC database. Why should he,when asimple
calltohislocal police department, andsome smooth talking sohesounds
convincingly like an insider, is all it takes to get the information he wants?
And thenext time, hejustcalls adifferent police agency anduses the
same pretext. 
  
 LINGO 
 SOSH: Law enforcement slang for a social security number 
 

You might wonder, isn't itrisky tocallapolice department, asheriff's
station, or a highway patrol office? Doesn't the attacker run a huge risk? 
Theanswer isno...andforaspecific reason. People inlawenforcement,
likepeople inthemilitary, have ingrained inthem from thefirst dayinthe
academy arespect forrank. Aslong asthesocial engineer isposing asa
sergeant orlieutenant--a higher rank than theperson he'stalking to-the
victim will begoverned bythat well-learned lesson that says you don't
question people who areinaposition ofauthority over you. Rank, in
other words, hasitsprivileges, inparticular theprivilege ofnotbeing
challenged by people of lower rank. 
But don't think law enforcement and themilitary aretheonly places
where thisrespect forrank canbeexploited bythesocial engineer. Social
engineers often useauthority orrank inthecorporate hierarchy asa
weapon intheir attacks onbusinesses -asanumber ofthestories inthese
pages demonstrate. 
PREVENTING THE CON 
What aresome steps your organization cantake toreduce thelikelihood
that social engineers will take advantage ofyour employees' natural
instinct to trust people? Here are some suggestions. 
Protect Your Customers 
Inthis electronic agemany companies that selltotheconsumer keep
credit cards onfile. There arereasons forthis: Itsaves thecustomer the
nuisance ofhaving toprovide thecredit card information each time he
visits thestore ortheWeb sitetomake apurchase. However, thepractice
should be discouraged. 
Ifyou must keep credit card numbers onfile, that process needs tobe
accompanied bysecurity provisions that gobeyond encryption orusing
access control. Employees need tobetrained torecognize social
engineering scams like theones inthis chapter. That fellow employee
you've never metinperson butwho hasbecome atelephone friend may
notbewho heorsheclaims tobe.Hemay nothave the"need toknow" to
access sensitive customer information, because hemay notactually work
for the company at all.
MITNICK MESSAGE

Everyone should beaware ofthesocial engineer's modus operandi:
Gather asmuch information about thetarget aspossible, and usethat
information to gain trust as an insider. Then go for the jugular! 
 

 
Trust Wisely 
It'snotjustthepeople who have access toclearly sensitive information -
thesoftware engineers, thefolks inR&D, andsoon-who need tobeon
thedefensive against intrusions. Almost everyone inyour organization
needs training toprotect the enterprise from industrial spies and
information thieves. 
Laying thegroundwork forthisshould begin with asurvey ofenterprise-
wide information assets, looking separately ateach sensitive, critical, or
valuable asset, and asking what methods anattacker might use to
compromise those assets through theuseofsocial engineering tactics.
Appropriate training for people who have trusted access tosuch
information should be designed around the answers to these questions. 
When anyone you don't know personally requests some information or
material, orasks you toperform anytask onyour computer, have your
employees askthemselves some. questions. IfIgave thisinformation to
myworst enemy, could itbeused toinjure meormycompany? DoI
completely understand thepotential effect ofthecommands Iambeing
asked to enter into my computer? 
Wedon't want togothrough lifebeing suspicious ofevery new person we
encounter. Yetthemore trusting weare, themore likely that thenext
social engineer toarrive intown willbeable todeceive usintogiving up
our company's proprietary information. 
What Belongs on Your Intranet? 
Parts ofyour intranet may beopen totheoutside world, other parts
restricted toemployees. How careful isyour company inmaking sure
sensitive information isn't posted where it'saccessible toaudiences you
meant toprotect itfrom? When isthe last time anyone inyour
organization checked tosee ifany sensitive information onyour
company's intranet had inadvertently been made available through the
public-access areas of your Web site? 
Ifyour company hasimplemented proxy servers asintermediaries to
protect theenterprise from electronic security threats, have those servers
been checked recently to be sure they're configured properly? 

In fact, has anyone ever checked the security of your intranet? 
 

 Chapter 5  
"Let Me Help You" 
We're allgrateful when we're plagued byaproblem andsomebody with
theknowledge, skill, andwillingness comes along offering tolend usa
hand. The social engineer understands that, and knows how totake
advantage of it. 
Healso knows how tocause aproblem foryou.., then make yougrateful
when heresolves theproblem.., and finally play onyour gratitude to
extract some information orasmall favor from youthatwill leave your
company (ormaybe you, individually) very much worse offforthe
encounter. And youmay never even know you've lostsomething ofvalue.
Here are some typical ways that social engineers step forward to "help." 
THE NETWORK OUTAGE 
Day/Time: Monday, February 12, 3:25 p.m.  
Place:  Offices of Starboard Shipbuilding 
The First Call: Tom Delay
"Tom DeLay, Bookkeeping." 
"Hey, Tom, this is Eddie Martin from the Help Desk. We're trying to
troubleshoot a computer networking problem. Do you know if anyone in
your group has been having trouble staying on line?" 
"Uh, not that I know of." 
"And you're not having any problems yourself." 
"No, seems fine." 
 

"Okay, that's good. Listen, we're calling people who might beaffected
'cause itLsimportant youletusknow right away ifyoulose your network
connection."
"That doesn't sound good. You think it might happen?"
"We hope not, but you'll call if it does, right?"
"You better believe it."
"Listen, sounds like having your network connection go down would be a
problem for you..."
"You bet it would."
"... so while we're working on this, let me give you my cell phone
number. Then you can reach me directly if you need to."
"That'd be great. Go ahead."
"It's 555 867 5309."
"555 867 5309. Got it. Hey, thanks. What was your name again?"
"It's Eddie. Listen, one other thing--I need to check which port your
computer is connected to. Take a look on your computer and see if there's
a sticker somewhere that says something like 'Port Number'."
"Hang on No, don't see anything like that."
"Okay, then in the back of the computer, can you recognize the network
cable."
"Yeah."
"Trace it back to where it's plugged in. See if there's a label on the jack it's
plugged into."
"Hold on a second. Yeah, wait a minute - I have to squat down here so I
can get close enough to read it. Okay - it says Port 6 dash 47."
"Good - that's what we had you down as, just making sure."
The Second Call: The IT Guy
Two days later, acall came through tothesame company's Network
Operations Center.
"Hi, thisisBob; I'minTom DeLay's office inBookkeeping. We're trying
to troubleshoot a cabling problem. I need you to disable Port 6-47."
The IT guy said it would be done in just a few minutes, and to let them
know when he was ready to have it enabled.
 

The Third Call: Getting Help from the Enemy 
 About an hour later, the guy who called himself Eddie Martin was
shopping at Circuit City when his cell phone rang. He checked the caller
ID, saw the call was from the shipbuilding company, and hurried to a
quiet spot before answering. 
"Help Desk, Eddie." 
"Oh, hey, Eddie. You've got an echo, where are you?" 
"I'm, uh, in a cabling closet. Who's this? 
"It's Tom DeLay. Boy, am I glad I got ahold of you. Maybe you
remember you called me the other day? My network connection just went
down like you said it might, and I'm a little panicky here." 
"Yeah, we've got a bunch of people down right now. We should have it
taken care of by the end of the day. That okay?" 
"NO! Damn, I'll get way behind if I'm down that long. What's the best you
can do for me?" 
"How pressed are you?" 
"I could do some other things for right now. Any chance you could take
care of it in half an hour?" 
"HALF AN HOUR! You don't want much. Well, look, I'll drop what I'm
doing and see if I can tackle it for you." 
"Hey, I really appreciate that, Eddie." 
The Fourth Call: Gotcha! 
Forty-five minutes later...
"Tom? It's Eddie. Go ahead and try your network connection." 
After a couple of moments: 
"Oh, good, it's working. That's just great." 
"Good, glad I could take care of it for you." 
"Yeah, thanks a lot." 
"Listen, ifyouwant tomake sure your connection doesn't godown again,
there's some software you oughta berunning. Just take acouple of
minutes." 
"Now's not the best time." 
"Iunderstand... Itcould save usboth bigheadaches thenext time this
network problem happens." 
 

"Well . . . if it's only a few minutes." 
"Here's what you do..." 
Eddie then took Tom through the steps ofdownloading asmall
application from aWeb site. After theprogram haddownloaded, Eddie
told Tom to double-click on it. He tried, but reported: 
"It's not working. It's not doing anything." 
"Oh, what apain. Something must bewrong with theprogram. Let's just
getridofit,wecantryagain another time." And hetalked Tom through
the steps of deleting the program so it couldn't be recovered. 
Total elapsed time, twelve minutes. 
The Attacker's Story 
Bobby Wallace always thought itwas laughable when hepicked upa
good assignment like this one and hisclient pussyfooted around the
unasked butobvious question ofwhy they wanted theinformation. Inthis
case hecould only think oftwo reasons. Maybe they represented some
outfit that was interested inbuying the target company, Starboard
Shipbuilding, andwanted toknow what kind offinancial shape they were
really in-especially allthestuff thetarget might want tokeep hidden
from apotential buyer. Ormaybe they represented investors who thought
there was something fishy about theway themoney was being handled
and wanted tofind outwhether some oftheexecutives had acase of
hands-in-the cookie-jar.    
And maybe hisclient also didn't want totellhimtherealreason because,
ifBobby knew how valuable theinformation was, he'd probably want
more money for doing the job. 
There arealotofways tocrack intoacompany's most secret files. Bobby
spent afew days mulling over thechoices and doing alittle checking
around before hedecided onaplan. Hesettled ononethatcalled foran
approach heespecially liked, where thetarget issetupsothatheasks the
attacker for help. 
Forstarters, Bobby picked upa$39.95 cellphone ataconvenience store.
Heplaced acalltotheman hehadchosen ashistarget, passed himself off
asbeing from thecompany help desk, andsetthings upsotheman would

callBobby's cellphone anytime hefound aproblem with hisnetwork
connection. 

Heleftapause oftwodays soasnottobetooobvious, andthen made a
calltothenetwork operations center (NOC) atthecompany. Heclaimed
hewastrouble-shooting aproblem forTom, thetarget, andasked tohave
Tom's network connection disabled. Bobby knew thiswas thetrickiest
part ofthewhole escapade -inmany companies, thehelp desk people
work closely with theNOC; infact, heknew thehelp desk isoften partof
theITorganization. Buttheindifferent NOC guy hespoke with treated
thecallasroutine, didn't askforthename ofthehelp desk person who
was supposedly working onthenetworking problem, and agreed to
disable thetarget's network port. When done, Tom would betotally
isolated from thecompany's intranet, unable toretrieve files from the
server, exchange files with hisco-workers, download hisemail, oreven
send apage ofdata totheprinter. Intoday's world, that's likeliving ina
cave. 
AsBobby expected, itwasn't long before hiscellphone rang. Ofcourse
hemade himself sound eager tohelp this poor "fellow employee" in
distress. Then hecalled theNOC andhadtheman's network connection
turned back on.Finally, hecalled theman and manipulated him once
again, thistime making him feel guilty forsaying noafter Bobby had
done him afavor. Tom agreed totherequest thathedownload apiece of
software to his computer. 
Ofcourse, what heagreed towasn't exactly what itseemed. Thesoftware
thatTom was toldwould keep hisnetwork connection from going down,
was really aTrojan Horse, asoftware application that didforTom's
computer what theoriginal deception didfortheTrojans: Itbrought the
enemy inside thecamp. Tom reported that nothing happened when he
double-clicked onthesoftware icon; thefact was that, bydesign, he
couldn't seeanything happening, even though thesmall application was
installing asecret program thatwould allow theinfiltrator covert access to
Tom's computer. 
With thesoftware running, Bobby was provided with complete control
over Tom's computer, anarrangement known asaremote command shell .
When Bobby accessed Tom's computer, hecould look fortheaccounting
files that might beofinterest andcopy them. Then, athisleisure, he'd
examine them fortheinformation thatwould give hisclients what they
were looking for.

LINGO
TROJAN HORSE: Aprogram containing malicious orharmful code,
designed todamage thevictim's computer orfiles, orobtain information
from thevictim's computer ornetwork. Some Trojans aredesigned tohide
within thecomputer's operating system and spyonevery keystroke or
action, oraccept instruction over anetwork connection toperform some
function, all without the victim being aware of its presence.
 

 
And thatwasn't all.Hecould goback atanytime tosearch through the
email messages andprivate memos ofthecompany's executives, running
atext search forwords that might reveal any interesting tidbits of
information. 
Late onthenight thatheconned histarget intoinstalling theTrojan Horse
software, Bobby threw thecellphone into aDumpster. Ofcourse hewas
careful toclear thememory first andpullthebattery outbefore hetossed
it-thelastthing hewanted was forsomebody tocallthecellphone's
number by mistake and have the phone start ringing! 
Analyzing the Con 
The attacker spins a web to convince the target he has a problem that, in
fact, doesn't really exist - or, as in this case, a problem that hasn't
happened yet, but that the attacker knows will  happen because he's going
to cause it. He then presents himself as the person who can provide the
solution. 
The setup in this kind of attack is particularly juicy for the attacker: 
Because of the seed planted in advance, when the target discovers he has 
a problem, he himself makes the phone call to plead for help. The attacker
just sits and waits for the phone to ring, a tactic fondly known in the trade 
as reverse social engineering . An attacker who can make the target call
him 
gains instant credibility: If I place a call to someone I think is on the help
desk,
I'm not going to start asking him to prove his identity. That's when the
attacker has it made.
LINGO
REMOTE COMMAND SHELL: A non graphical interface that accepts
text based commands to perform certain functions or run programs. An
attacker who exploits technical vulnerabilities or is able to install a Trojan
Horse program on the victims computer may be able to obtain remote
access to a command shell
REVERSE SOCIAL ENGINEERING: A social
engineering attack in which the attacker sets up a
situation where the victim encounters a problem and

contacts the attacker for help. Another form of reverse
social engineering turns the tables on the attacker. The
target recognizes the attack, and uses psychological
principles of influence to draw out as much information
as possible from the attacker so that the business can
safeguard targeted assets.

MITNICK MESSAGE
If a stranger does you a favor, then asks you for a favor,
don't reciprocate without thinking carefully about what
he's asking for. 
Inaconlike thisone, thesocial engineer tries topick atarget who is
likely tohave limited knowledge ofcomputers. The more heknows, the
more likely thathe'll getsuspicious, orjustplain figure outthathe'sbeing
manipulated. What Isometimes call thecomputer-challenged worker,
who isless knowledgeable about technology and procedures, ismore
likely tocomply. He's allthemore likely tofallforaruse like "Just
download this little program," because hehasnoidea ofthepotential
damage asoftware program can inflict. What's more, there's amuch
smaller chance he'll understand thevalue oftheinformation onthe
computer network that he's placing at risk. 
A LITTLE HELP FOR THE NEW GAL 
New employees arearipe target forattackers. They don't know many
people yet,they don't know theprocedures orthedosanddon'ts ofthe
company. And, inthename ofmaking agood first impression, they're
eager show how cooperative and quick to respond they can be. 
Helpful Andrea  
"Human Resources, Andrea Calhoun." 
"Andrea, hi, this is Alex, with Corporate Security." 
"Yes?" 
"How're you doing today?" 
"Okay. What can I help you with?" 
"Listen, we're developing a security seminar for new employees and we
need to round up some people to try it out on. I want to get the name and
phone number of all the new hires in the past month. Can you help me
with that?" 
"I won't be able to get to it 'til this afternoon. Is that okay? 
"What's your extension?" 
 


[Note: PDF has 577 pages, only first 100 pages extracted]