Senior Acquisitions Editor: Kenyon Brown
Development Editor: Kim Wimpsett
Technical Editor: Todd Montgomery
Production Editor: Christine O'Connor
Copy Editor: Judy Flynn
Editorial Manager: Mary Beth Wakefield
Production Manager: Kathleen Wisor
Executive Publisher: Jim Minatel
Book Designers: Judy Fung and Bill Gibson
Proofreader: Josh Chase, Word One New York
Indexer: Johnna vanHoose Dinse
Project Coordinator, Cover: Brent Savage
Cover Designer: Wiley
Cover Image: Getty Images Inc./Jeremy Woodhouse
Copyright © 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
ISBN: 978-1-119-28828-2
ISBN: 978-1-119-28830-5 (ebk.)
ISBN: 978-1-119-28829-9 (ebk.)
Manufactured in the United States of America
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as
permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978)
646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or
online at 
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions
.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author make no representations or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically
disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that
the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional services. If professional
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. Neither the
publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or
Web site is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not
mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Web site may
provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Web sites
listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is
read.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at (877) 762-2974, outside the U.S. at (317) 572-3993
or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand.
If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you
may download this material at 
http://booksupport.wiley.com
. For more information about Wiley
products, visit 
www.wiley.com
.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016950861
TRADEMARKS: Wiley, the Wiley logo, and the Sybex logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates, in the United States and other countries, and may not be
used without written permission. CCNA is a registered trademark of Cisco Technology, Inc. All other
trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with
any product or vendor mentioned in this book.

Acknowledgments
There are many people who work to put a book together, and as an author, I dedicated an
enormous amount of time to write this book, but it would have never been published without the
dedicated, hard work of many other people.
Kenyon Brown, my acquisitions editor, is instrumental to my success in the world of Cisco
certification. Ken, I look forward to our continued progress together in both the print and video
markets! My technical editor, Todd Montgomery, was absolutely amazing to work with and he
was always there to check my work and make suggestions. Thank you! Also, I've worked with
Kim Wimpsett, the development editor, for years now and she coordinated all the pages you hold
in your hands as they flew from thoughts in my head to the production process.
Christine O'Connor, my production editor, and Judy Flynn, my copyeditor, were my rock and
foundation for formatting and intense editing of every page in this book. This amazing team gives
me the confidence to help keep me moving during the difficult and very long days, week after
week. How Christine stays so organized with all my changes as well as making sure every figure is
in the right place in the book is still a mystery to me! You're amazing, Christine! Thank you! Judy
understands my writing style so well now, after doing at least a dozen books with me, that she
even sometimes finds a technical error that may have slipped through as I was going through the
material. Thank you, Judy, for doing such a great job! I truly thank you both.

About the Author
Todd Lammle
 is the authority on Cisco certification and internetworking and is Cisco certified
in most Cisco certification categories. He is a world-renowned author, speaker, trainer, and
consultant. Todd has three decades of experience working with LANs, WANs, and large
enterprise licensed and unlicensed wireless networks, and lately he's been implementing large
Cisco Firepower networks. His years of real-world experience are evident in his writing; he is not
just an author but an experienced networking engineer with very practical experience working
on the largest networks in the world, at such companies as Xerox, Hughes Aircraft, Texaco, AAA,
Cisco, and Toshiba, among many others. Todd has published over 60 books, including the very
popular 
CCNA: Cisco Certified Network Associate Study Guide, CCNA Wireless Study Guide,
CCNA Data Center Study Guide, and SSFIPS (Firepower)
, all from Sybex. He runs an
international consulting and training company based in Colorado, Texas, and San Francisco.
You can reach Todd through his forum and blog at 
www.lammle.com/ccna
.

CONTENTS
Introduction
Assessment Test
Answers to Assessment Test
Part 1 ICND1
Chapter 1 Internetworking
Internetworking Basics
Internetworking Models
The OSI Reference Model
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 2 Ethernet Networking and Data Encapsulation
Ethernet Networks in Review
Ethernet Cabling
Data Encapsulation
The Cisco Three-Layer Hierarchical Model
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 3 Introduction to TCP/IP
Introducing TCP/IP
TCP/IP and the DoD Model
IP Addressing
IPv4 Address Types
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 4 Easy Subnetting
Subnetting Basics
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 5 VLSMs, Summarization, and Troubleshooting TCP/IP
Variable Length Subnet Masks (VLSMs)
Summarization
Troubleshooting IP Addressing
Summary
Exam Essentials

Written Lab 5
Review Questions
Chapter 6 Cisco’s Internetworking Operating System (IOS)
The IOS User Interface
Command-Line Interface (CLI)
Administrative Configurations
Router and Switch Interfaces
Viewing, Saving, and Erasing Configurations
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 6: IOS Understanding
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 7 Managing a Cisco Internetwork
The Internal Components of a Cisco Router and Switch
Backing Up and Restoring the Cisco Configuration
Configuring DHCP
Syslog
Network Time Protocol (NTP)
Exploring Connected Devices Using CDP and LLDP
Using Telnet
Resolving Hostnames
Checking Network Connectivity and Troubleshooting
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Labs 7
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 8 Managing Cisco Devices
Managing the Configuration Register
Backing Up and Restoring the Cisco IOS
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 8
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 9 IP Routing
Routing Basics
The IP Routing Process
Configuring IP Routing
Configuring IP Routing in Our Network
Dynamic Routing
Routing Information Protocol (RIP)
Summary

Exam Essentials
Written Lab 9
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 10 Layer 2 Switching
Switching Services
Configuring Catalyst Switches
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 10
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 11 VLANs and Inter-VLAN Routing
VLAN Basics
Identifying VLANs
Routing between VLANs
Configuring VLANs
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 11
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 12 Security
Perimeter, Firewall, and Internal Routers
Introduction to Access Lists
Standard Access Lists
Extended Access Lists
Monitoring Access Lists
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 12
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 13 Network Address Translation (NAT)
When Do We Use NAT?
Types of Network Address Translation
NAT Names
How NAT Works
Testing and Troubleshooting NAT
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 13
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions

Chapter 14 Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6)
Why Do We Need IPv6?
The Benefits and Uses of IPv6
IPv6 Addressing and Expressions
How IPv6 Works in an Internetwork
IPv6 Routing Protocols
Configuring IPv6 on Our Internetwork
Configuring Routing on Our Internetwork
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Labs 14
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
PART II ICND 2
Chapter 15 Enhanced Switched Technologies
VLAN Review
VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP)
Configuring VTP
Spanning Tree Protocol (STP)
Types of Spanning-tree Protocols
Modifying and Verifying the Bridge ID
Spanning-Tree Failure Consequences
PortFast and BPDU Guard
EtherChannel
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 15
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 16 Network Device Management and Security
Mitigating Threats at the Access Layer
External Authentication Options
Client Redundancy Issues
Introducing First Hop Redundancy Protocols (FHRPs)
Hot Standby Router Protocol (HSRP)
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 16
Review Questions
Chapter 17 Enhanced IGRP
EIGRP Features and Operations
Configuring EIGRP
Verifying and Troubleshooting EIGRP
EIGRPv6

Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 17
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 18 Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)
Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) Basics
Configuring OSPF
OSPF and Loopback Interfaces
Verifying OSPF Configuration
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 18
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 19 Multi-Area OSPF
OSPF Scalability
Categories of Multi-area Components
Basic Multi-area Configuration
Verifying and Troubleshooting Multi-area OSPF Networks
Troubleshooting OSPF Scenario
OSPFv3
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 19
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 20 Troubleshooting IP, IPv6, and VLANs
Troubleshooting IP Network Connectivity
Troubleshooting IPv6 Network Connectivity
Troubleshooting VLAN Connectivity
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 20
Review Questions
Chapter 21 Wide Area Networks
Introduction to Wide Area Networks
Cabling the Serial Wide Area Network
High-Level Data-Link Control (HDLC) Protocol
Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)
Virtual Private Networks
GRE Tunnels
Single-Homed EBGP
Summary

Exam Essentials
Written Lab 21
Hands-on Labs
Review Questions
Chapter 22 Evolution of Intelligent Networks
Switch Stacking
Cloud Computing and Its Effect on the Enterprise Network
Overview of Network Programmability in Enterprise Network
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs)
Cisco APIC-EM
Cisco Intelligent WAN
Quality of Service
Trust Boundary
QoS Mechanisms
Summary
Exam Essentials
Written Lab 22
Review Questions
Appendix A Answers to Written Labs
Chapter 1: Internetworking
Chapter 2: Ethernet Networking and Data Encapsulation
Chapter 3: Introduction to TCP/IP
Chapter 4: Easy Subnetting
Chapter 5: VLSMs, Summarization and Troubleshooting TCP/IP
Chapter 6: Cisco’s Internetworking Operating System (IOS)
Chapter 7: Managing a Cisco Internetwork
Chapter 8: Managing Cisco Devices
Chapter 9: IP Routing
Chapter 10: Layer 2 Switching
Chapter 11: VLANs and InterVLAN Routing
Chapter 12: Security
Chapter 13: Network Address Translation (NAT)
Chapter 14: Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6)
Chapter 15: Enhanced Switched Technologies
Chapter 16: Network Device Management and Security
Chapter 17: Enhanced IGRP
Chapter 18: Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)
Chapter 19: Multi-Area OSPF
Chapter 20: Troubleshooting IP, IPv6, and VLANs
Chapter 21: Wide Area Networks
Chapter 22: Evolution of Intelligent Networks
Appendix B Answers to Review Questions
Chapter 1: Internetworking
Chapter 2: Ethernet Networking and Data Encapsulation

Chapter 3: Introduction to TCP/IP
Chapter 4: Easy Subnetting
Chapter 5: VLSMs, Summarization, and Troubleshooting TCP/IP
Chapter 6: Cisco’s Internetworking Operating System (IOS)
Chapter 7: Managing a Cisco Internetwork
Chapter 8: Managing Cisco Devices
Chapter 9: IP Routing
Chapter 10: Layer 2 Switching
Chapter 11: VLANs and InterVLAN Routing
Chapter 12: Security
Chapter 13: Network Address Translation (NAT)
Chapter 14: Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6)
Chapter 15: Enhanced Switched Technologies
Chapter 16: Network Device Management and Security
Chapter 17: Enhanced IGRP
Chapter 18: Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)
Chapter 19: Multi-Area OSPF
Chapter 20: Troubleshooting IP, IPv6, and VLANs
Chapter 21: Wide Area Networks
Chapter 22: Evolution of Intelligent Networks
Appendix C Disabling and Configuring Network Services
Blocking SNMP Packets
Disabling Echo
Turning off BootP and Auto-Config
Disabling the HTTP Interface
Disabling IP Source Routing
Disabling Proxy ARP
Disabling Redirect Messages
Disabling the Generation of ICMP Unreachable Messages
Disabling Multicast Route Caching
Disabling the Maintenance Operation Protocol (MOP)
Turning Off the X.25 PAD Service
Enabling the Nagle TCP Congestion Algorithm
Logging Every Event
Disabling Cisco Discovery Protocol
Disabling the Default Forwarded UDP Protocols
Cisco’s 
auto secure
Advert
EULA
List of Tables
Introduction
Table I.1
Table I.2

Table I.3
Table I.4
Table I.5
Table I.6
Table I.7
Table I.8
Table I.9
Table I.10
Table I.11
Table I.12
Table I.13
Table I.14
Table I.15
Table I.16
Table I.17
Chapter 2
Table 2.1
Table 2.2
Table 2.3
Chapter 3
Table 3.1
Table 3.2
Table 3.3
Table 3.4
Table 3.5
Chapter 4
Table 4.1
Table 4.2
Table 4.3
Chapter 5
Table 5.1
Chapter 6
Table 6.1
Table 6.2
Table 6.3
Chapter 7
Table 7.1
Table 7.2
Table 7.3

Chapter 8
Table 8.1
Table 8.2
Table 8.3
Chapter 9
Table 9.1
Table 9.2
Chapter 12
Table 12.1
Chapter 13
Table 13.1
Table 13.2
Table 13.3
Chapter 14
Table 14.1
Table 14.2
Chapter 15
Table 15.1
Chapter 17
Table 17.1
Table 17.2
Chapter 18
Table 18.1
Table 18.2
Table 18.3
Chapter 19
Table 19.1
Chapter 21
Table 21.1
List of Illustrations
Introduction
Figure I.1
 The Cisco certification path.
Chapter 1
Figure 1.1
 A very basic network
Figure 1.2
 A switch can break up collision domains.
Figure 1.3
 Routers create an internetwork.
Figure 1.4
 Internetworking devices
Figure 1.5
 Switched networks creating an internetwork

Figure 1.6
 Other devices typically found in our internetworks today.
Figure 1.7
 The upper layers
Figure 1.8
 The lower layers
Figure 1.9
 OSI layer functions
Figure 1.10
 Establishing a connection-oriented session
Figure 1.11
 Transmitting segments with flow control
Figure 1.12
 Windowing
Figure 1.13
 Transport layer reliable delivery
Figure 1.14
 Routing table used in a router
Figure 1.15
 A router in an internetwork. Each router LAN interface is a broadcast
domain. Routers break up broadcast domains by default and provide WAN services.
Figure 1.16
 Data Link layer
Figure 1.17
 A switch in an internetwork
Figure 1.18
 A hub in a network
Figure 1.19
 Physical vs. Logical Topolgies
Chapter 2
Figure 2.1
 Legacy collision domain design
Figure 2.2
 A typical network you’d see today
Figure 2.3
 A router creates broadcast domain boundaries.
Figure 2.4
 CSMA/CD
Figure 2.5
 Half-duplex example
Figure 2.6
 Full-duplex example
Figure 2.7
 Ethernet addressing using MAC addresses
Figure 2.8
 Typical Ethernet frame format
Figure 2.9
 Category 5 Enhanced UTP cable
Figure 2.10
 Straight-through Ethernet cable
Figure 2.11
 Crossover Ethernet cable
Figure 2.12
 Typical uses for straight-through and cross-over Ethernet cables
Figure 2.13
 UTP Gigabit crossover Ethernet cable
Figure 2.14
 Rolled Ethernet cable
Figure 2.15
 Configuring your console emulation program
Figure 2.16
 A Cisco 2960 console connections
Figure 2.17
 RJ45 UTP cable question #1
Figure 2.18
 RJ45 UTP cable question #2
Figure 2.19
 Typical fiber cable.
Figure 2.20
 Multimode and single-mode fibers
Figure 2.21
 Data encapsulation
Figure 2.22
 PDU and layer addressing
Figure 2.23
 Port numbers at the Transport layer
Figure 2.24
 The Cisco hierarchical model

Chapter 3
Figure 3.1
 The DoD and OSI models
Figure 3.2
 The TCP/IP protocol suite
Figure 3.3
 Telnet
Figure 3.4
 Secure Shell
Figure 3.5
 FTP
Figure 3.6
 TFTP
Figure 3.7
 SNMP
Figure 3.8
 HTTP
Figure 3.9
 NTP
Figure 3.10
 DNS
Figure 3.11
 DHCP client four-step process
Figure 3.12
 TCP segment format
Figure 3.13
 UDP segment
Figure 3.14
 Port numbers for TCP and UDP
Figure 3.15
 IP header
Figure 3.16
 The Protocol field in an IP header
Figure 3.17
 ICMP error message is sent to the sending host from the remote router.
Figure 3.18
 ICMP in action
Figure 3.19
 Local ARP broadcast
Figure 3.20
 Summary of the three classes of networks
Figure 3.21
 Local layer 2 broadcasts
Figure 3.22
 Layer 3 broadcasts
Figure 3.23
 Unicast address
Figure 3.24
 EIGRP multicast example
Chapter 4
Figure 4.1
 One network
Figure 4.2
 Multiple networks connected together
Figure 4.3
 Implementing a Class C /25 logical network
Figure 4.4
 Implementing a class C /26 (with three networks)
Figure 4.5
 Implementing a Class C /27 logical network
Chapter 5
Figure 5.1
 Typical classful network
Figure 5.2
 Classless network design
Figure 5.3
 The VLSM table
Figure 5.4
 VLSM network example 1
Figure 5.5
 VLSM table example 1
Figure 5.6
 VLSM network example 2
Figure 5.7
 VLSM table example 2

Figure 5.8
 VLSM design example 1
Figure 5.9
 Solution to VLSM design example 1
Figure 5.10
 VLSM design example 2
Figure 5.11
 Solution to VLSM design example 2
Figure 5.12
 Summary address used in an internetwork
Figure 5.13
 Summarization example 4
Figure 5.14
 Summarization example 5
Figure 5.15
 Basic IP troubleshooting
Figure 5.16
 IP address problem 1
Figure 5.17
 IP address problem 2
Figure 5.18
 Find the valid host #1
Figure 5.19
 Find the valid host #2
Figure 5.20
 Find the valid host address #3
Figure 5.21
 Find the valid subnet mask
Chapter 6
Figure 6.1
 A Cisco 2960 switch
Figure 6.2
 A new Cisco 1900 router
Figure 6.3
 A typical WAN connection. Clocking is typically provided by a DCE network
to routers. In nonproduction environments, a DCE network is not always present.
Figure 6.4
 Providing clocking on a nonproduction network
Figure 6.5
 Where do you configure clocking? Use the 
show controllers
 command on each
router’s serial interface to find out.
Figure 6.6
 By looking at R1, the 
show controllers
 command reveals that R1 and R2 can’t
communicate.
Chapter 7
Figure 7.1
 Router bootup process
Figure 7.2
 DHCP configuration example on a switch
Figure 7.3
 Configuring a DHCP relay
Figure 7.4
 Messages sent to a syslog server
Figure 7.5
 Synchronizing time information
Figure 7.6
 Cisco Discovery Protocol
Figure 7.7
 Documenting a network topology using CDP
Figure 7.8
 Network topology documented
Chapter 8
Figure 8.1
 Copying an IOS from a router to a TFTP host
Chapter 9
Figure 9.1
 A simple routing example
Figure 9.2
 IP routing example using two hosts and one router
Figure 9.3
 Frame used from Host A to the Lab_A router when Host B is pinged
Figure 9.4
 IP routing example 1

Figure 9.5
 IP routing example 2
Figure 9.6
 Basic IP routing using MAC and IP addresses
Figure 9.7
 Testing basic routing knowledge
Figure 9.8
 Configuring IP routing
Figure 9.9
 Our internetwork
Chapter 10
Figure 10.1
 Empty forward/filter table on a switch
Figure 10.2
 How switches learn hosts’ locations
Figure 10.3
 Forward/filter table
Figure 10.4
 Forward/filter table answer
Figure 10.5
 “Port security” on a switch port restricts port access by MAC address.
Figure 10.6
 Protecting a PC in a lobby
Figure 10.7
 Broadcast storm
Figure 10.8
 Multiple frame copies
Figure 10.9
 A Cisco Catalyst switch
Figure 10.10
 Our switched network
Chapter 11
Figure 11.1
 Flat network structure
Figure 11.2
 The benefit of a switched network
Figure 11.3
 One switch, one LAN: Before VLANs, there were no separations between
hosts.
Figure 11.4
 One switch, two virtual LANs (
logical
 separation between hosts): Still
physically one switch, but this switch acts as many separate devices.
Figure 11.5
 Access ports
Figure 11.6
 VLANs can span across multiple switches by using trunk links, which carry
traffic for multiple VLANs.
Figure 11.7
 IEEE 802.1q encapsulation with and without the 802.1q tag
Figure 11.8
 Router connecting three VLANs together for inter-VLAN communication,
one router interface for each VLAN
Figure 11.9
 Router on a stick: single router interface connecting all three VLANs
together for inter-VLAN communication
Figure 11.10
 A router creates logical interfaces.
Figure 11.11
 With IVR, routing runs on the backplane of the switch, and it appears to the
hosts that a router is present.
Figure 11.12
 Configuring inter-VLAN example 1
Figure 11.13
 Inter-VLAN example 2
Figure 11.14
 Inter-VLAN example 3
Figure 11.15
 Inter-VLAN example 4
Figure 11.16
 Inter-VLAN routing with a multilayer switch
Chapter 12
Figure 12.1
 A typical secured network

Figure 12.2
 IP access list example with three LANs and a WAN connection
Figure 12.3
 IP standard access list example 2
Figure 12.4
 IP standard access list example 3
Figure 12.5
 Extended ACL example 1
Figure 12.6
 Extended ACL example 3
Chapter 13
Figure 13.1
 Where to configure NAT
Figure 13.2
 Basic NAT translation
Figure 13.3
 NAT overloading example (PAT)
Figure 13.4
 NAT example
Figure 13.5
 Another NAT example
Figure 13.6
 Last NAT example
Chapter 14
Figure 14.1
 IPv6 address example
Figure 14.2
 IPv6 global unicast addresses
Figure 14.3
 IPv6 link local FE80::/10: The first 10 bits define the address type.
Figure 14.4
 EUI-64 interface ID assignment
Figure 14.5
 Two steps to IPv6 autoconfiguration
Figure 14.6
 IPv6 autoconfiguration example
Figure 14.7
 IPv6 header
Figure 14.8
 ICMPv6
Figure 14.9
 Router solicitation (RS) and router advertisement (RA)
Figure 14.10
 Neighbor solicitation (NS) and neighbor advertisement (NA)
Figure 14.11
 Duplicate address detection (DAD)
Figure 14.12
 IPv6 static and default routing
Figure 14.13
 Our internetwork
Chapter 15
Figure 15.1
 VTP modes
Figure 15.2
 A switched network with switching loops
Figure 15.3
 A switched network with STP
Figure 15.4
 STP operations
Figure 15.5
 STP operations
Figure 15.6
 STP operations
Figure 15.7
 STP operations
Figure 15.8
 Common STP example
Figure 15.9
 PVST+ provides efficient root bridge selection.
Figure 15.10
 PVST+ unique bridge ID
Figure 15.11
 RSTP example 1
Figure 15.12
 RSTP example 1 answer

Figure 15.13
 RSTP example 2
Figure 15.14
 RSTP example 2, answer 1
Figure 15.15
 RSTP example 2, answer 2
Figure 15.16
 Our simple three-switch network
Figure 15.17
 STP stopping loops
Figure 15.18
 STP failure
Figure 15.19
 PortFast
Figure 15.20
 Before and after port channels
Figure 15.21
 EtherChannel example
Chapter 16
Figure 16.1
 Mitigating threats at the access layer
Figure 16.2
 DHCP snooping and DAI
Figure 16.3
 Identity-based networking
Figure 16.4
 SNMP GET and TRAP messages
Figure 16.5
 Cisco’s MIB OIDs
Figure 16.6
 Default gateway
Figure 16.7
 Proxy ARP
Figure 16.8
 FHRPs use a virtual router with a virtual IP address and virtual MAC
address.
Figure 16.9
 HSRP active and standby routers
Figure 16.10
 Example of HSRP active and standby routers swapping interfaces
Figure 16.11
 HSRP Hellos
Figure 16.12
 Interface tracking setup
Figure 16.13
 HSRP configuration and verification
Figure 16.14
 HSRP load balancing per VLAN
Chapter 17
Figure 17.1
 EIGRP neighbor discovery
Figure 17.2
 Advertised distance
Figure 17.3
 Feasible distance
Figure 17.4
 The tables used by EIGRP
Figure 17.5
 Configuring our little internetwork with EIGRP
Figure 17.6
 Discontiguous networks
Figure 17.7
 EIGRP route selection process
Figure 17.8
 Split horizon in action, part 1
Figure 17.9
 Split horizon in action, part 2
Figure 17.10
 Troubleshooting scenario
Figure 17.11
 Configuring EIGRPv6 on our internetwork
Chapter 18
Figure 18.1
 OSPF design example. An OSPF hierarchical design minimizes routing table
entries and keeps the impact of any topology changes contained within a specific area.

Figure 18.2
 The Hello protocol
Figure 18.3
 Sample OSPF wildcard configuration
Figure 18.4
 Our new network layout
Figure 18.5
 Adding a non-OSPF network to the LA router
Figure 18.6
 OSPF router ID (RID)
Chapter 19
Figure 19.1
 OSPF single-area network: All routers flood the network with link-state
information to all other routers within the same area.
Figure 19.2
 OSPF multi-area network: All routers flood the network only within their
area.
Figure 19.3
 Router roles: Routers within an area are called internal routers.
Figure 19.4
 Type 1 Link-State Advertisements
Figure 19.5
 Basic LSA types
Figure 19.6
 OSPF neighbor states, part 1
Figure 19.7
 OSPF router neighbor states, part 2
Figure 19.8
 Our internetwork
Figure 19.9
 Our internetwork
Figure 19.10
 Our internetwork with dual links
Figure 19.11
 Configuring OSPFv3
Chapter 20
Figure 20.1
 Troubleshooting scenario
Figure 20.2
 Using SPAN for troubleshooting
Figure 20.3
 Extended ACLs
Figure 20.4
 IPv6 troubleshooting scenario
Figure 20.5
 Router solicitation (RS) and router advertisement (RA)
Figure 20.6
 Neighbor solicitation (NS) and neighbor advertisement (NA)
Figure 20.7
 VLAN connectivity
Chapter 21
Figure 21.1
 Hub-and-spoke
Figure 21.2
 Fully meshed topology
Figure 21.3
 Partially meshed topology
Figure 21.4
 WAN terms
Figure 21.5
 WAN connection types
Figure 21.6
 Branch WAN challenges
Figure 21.7
 Intelligent WAN
Figure 21.8
 IWAN four technology pillars
Figure 21.9
 DTE-DCE-DTE WAN connection: Clocking is typically provided by the DCE
network to routers. In nonproduction environments, a DCE network is not always present.
Figure 21.10
 Cisco’s HDLC frame format: Each vendor’s HDLC has a proprietary data
field to support multiprotocol environments.
Figure 21.11
 Configuring Cisco’s HDLC proprietary WAN encapsulation

Figure 21.12
 Point-to-Point Protocol stack
Figure 21.13
 PPP session establishment
Figure 21.14
 PPP authentication example
Figure 21.15
 Failed PPP authentication
Figure 21.16
 Mismatched WAN encapsulations
Figure 21.17
 Mismatched IP addresses
Figure 21.18
 MLP between Corp and SF routers
Figure 21.19
 PPPoE with ADSL
Figure 21.20
 Example of using a VPN
Figure 21.21
 Enterprise-managed VPNs
Figure 21.22
 Provider-managed VPNs
Figure 21.23
 Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) tunnel structure
Figure 21.24
 Example of GRE configuration
Figure 21.25
 Example of EBGP lay layout
Chapter 22
Figure 22.1
 Switch stacking
Figure 22.2
 Cloud computing is on-demand.
Figure 22.3
 Advantages of cloud computing
Figure 22.4
 Cloud computing service
Figure 22.5
 The SDN architecture
Figure 22.6
 Southbound interfaces
Figure 22.7
 Northbound interfaces
Figure 22.8
 Where APIC-EM fits in the SDN stack
Figure 22.9
 APIC-Enterprise Module
Figure 22.10
 APIC-Enterprise Module path trace sample
Figure 22.11
 APIC-Enterprise Module IWAN
Figure 22.12
 Traffic characteristics
Figure 22.13
 Trust boundaries
Figure 22.14
 Policing and shaping rate limiters
Figure 22.15
 Congestion management
Figure 22.16
 Queuing mechanisms
Figure 22.17
 Congestion avoidance

Introduction
Welcome to the exciting world of Cisco certification! If you've picked up this book because you
want to improve yourself and your life with a better, more satisfying, and secure job, you've done
the right thing. Whether you're striving to enter the thriving, dynamic IT sector or seeking to
enhance your skill set and advance your position within it, being Cisco certified can seriously
stack the odds in your favor to help you attain your goals!
Cisco certifications are powerful instruments of success that also markedly improve your grasp
of all things internetworking. As you progress through this book, you'll gain a complete
understanding of networking that reaches far beyond Cisco devices. By the end of this book,
you'll comprehensively know how disparate network topologies and technologies work together
to form the fully operational networks that are vital to today's very way of life in the developed
world. The knowledge and expertise you'll gain here is essential for and relevant to every
networking job and is why Cisco certifications are in such high demand—even at companies with
few Cisco devices!
Although it's now common knowledge that Cisco rules routing and switching, the fact that it also
rocks the security, collaboration, data center, wireless and service provider worlds is also well
recognized. And Cisco certifications reach way beyond the popular but less extensive
certifications like those offered by CompTIA and Microsoft to equip you with indispensable
insight into today's vastly complex networking realm. Essentially, by deciding to become Cisco
certified, you're proudly announcing that you want to become an unrivaled networking expert—a
goal that this book will get you well on your way to achieving. Congratulations in advance on the
beginning of your brilliant future!
For up-to-the-minute updates covering additions or modifications to the Cisco
certification exams, as well as additional study tools, review questions, videos, and bonus
materials, be sure to visit the Todd Lammle websites and forum at 
www.lammle.com/ccna
.
Cisco's Network Certifications
It used to be that to secure the holy grail of Cisco certifications—the CCIE—you passed only one
written test before being faced with a grueling, formidable hands-on lab. This intensely daunting,
all-or-nothing approach made it nearly impossible to succeed and predictably didn't work out too
well for most people. Cisco responded to this issue by creating a series of new certifications,
which not only made it easier to eventually win the highly coveted CCIE prize, it gave employers
a way to accurately rate and measure the skill levels of prospective and current employees. This
exciting paradigm shift in Cisco's certification path truly opened doors that few were allowed
through before!
Beginning in 1998, obtaining the Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) certification was the
first milestone in the Cisco certification climb, as well as the official prerequisite to each of the
more advanced levels. But that changed in 2007, when Cisco announced the Cisco Certified
Entry Network Technician (CCENT) certification. And then in May 2016, Cisco once again
proclaimed updates to the CCENT and CCNA Routing and Switching (R/S) tests. Now the Cisco
certification process looks like 
Figure I.1
.

Figure I.1
 The Cisco certification path.
I have included only the most popular tracks in 
Figure I.1
. In addition to the ones
in this image, there are also tracks for Design, Service Provider, Service Provider
Operations, and Video.
The Cisco R/S path is by far the most popular and could very well remain so, but soon you'll see
the Data Center path become more and more of a focus as companies migrate to data center
technologies. The Security and Collaboration tracks also actually does provide a good job
opportunity, and an even newer one that is becoming more popular is the Industrial CCNA. Still,
understanding the foundation of R/S before attempting any other certification track is
something I highly recommend.
Even so, and as the figure shows, you only need your CCENT certification to get underway for
most of the tracks. Also, note that there are a few other certification tracks you can go down that
are not shown in the figure, although they're not as popular as the ones shown.
Cisco Certified Entry Network Technician (CCENT)
Don't be fooled by the oh-so-misleading name of this first certification because it absolutely isn't
entry level! Okay—maybe entry level for Cisco's certification path, but definitely not for
someone without experience trying to break into the highly lucrative yet challenging IT job
market! For the uninitiated, the CompTIA A+ and Network+ certifications aren't
 official
prerequisites, but know that Cisco does expect you to have that type and level of experience
before embarking on your Cisco certification journey.
All of this gets us to 2016, when the climb to Cisco supremacy just got much harder again. The
innocuous-sounding siren's call of the CCENT can lure you to some serious trouble if you're not
prepared, because it's actually much harder than the old CCNA ever was. This will rapidly
become apparent once you start studying, but be encouraged! The fact that the certification
process is getting harder really works better for you in the long run, because that which is harder
to obtain only becomes that much more valuable when you finally do, right? Yes, indeed!
Another important factor to keep in mind is that the Interconnection Cisco Network Devices
Part 1 (ICND1) exam, which is the required exam for the CCENT certification, costs $150 per
attempt and it's anything but easy to pass! The good news is that Part 1 of this book (Chapters 1-
14) will guide you step-by-step in building a strong foundation in routing and switching
technologies. You really need to build on a strong technical foundation and stay away from exam
cram type books, suspicious online material, and the like. They can help somewhat, but
understand that you'll pass the Cisco certification exams only if you have a strong foundation
and that you'll get that solid foundation only by reading as much as you can, performing the
written labs and review questions in this book, and practicing lots and lots of hands-on labs.
Additional practice exam questions, videos, and labs are offered on my website, and what seems
like a million other sites offer additional material that can help you study.

However, there is one way to skip the CCENT exam and still meet the prerequisite before moving
on to any other certification track, and that path is through the CCNA R/S Composite exam.
First, I'll discuss the Interconnecting Cisco Network Devices Part 2 (ICND2) exam, and then I'll
tell you about the CCNA Composite exam, which will provide you, when successful, with both the
CCENT and the CCNA R/S certification.
Cisco Certified Network Associate Routing and Switching
(CCNA R/S)
Once you have achieved your CCENT certification, you can take the ICND2 (200-105) exam in
order to achieve your CCNA R/S certification, which is the most popular certification Cisco has
by far because it's the most sought-after certification of all employers.
As with the CCENT, the ICND2 exam is also $150 per attempt—although thinking you can just
skim a book and pass any of these exams would probably be a really expensive mistake! The
CCENT/CCNA exams are extremely hard and cover a lot of material, so you have to really know
your stuff. Taking a Cisco class or spending months with hands-on experience is definitely a
requirement to succeed when faced with this monster!
And once you have your CCNA, you don't have to stop there—you can choose to continue and
achieve an even higher certification, called the Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP).
There are various ones, as shown in Figure NaN.1. The CCNP R/S is still the most popular, with
Voice certifications coming in at a close second. And I've got to tell you that the Data Center
certification will be catching up fast. Also good to know is
 that anyone with a CCNP R/S has all
the skills and knowledge needed to attempt the notoriously dreaded but coveted CCIE R/S lab.
But just becoming a CCNA R/S can land you that job you've dreamed about and that's what this
book is all about: helping you to get and keep a great job!
Still, why take two exams to get your CCNA if you don't have to? Cisco still has the CCNA
Composite (200-125) exam that, if passed, will land you with your CCENT and your CCNA R/S
via only one test priced at only $250. Some people like the one-test approach, and some people
like the two-test approach. Part 2 of this book (Chapters 15-22) covers the ICND2 exam topics.
Why Become a CCENT and CCNA R/S?
Cisco, like Microsoft and other vendors that provide certification, has created the certification
process to give administrators a set of skills and to equip prospective employers with a way to
measure those skills or match certain criteria. And as you probably know, becoming a CCNA R/S
is certainly the initial, key step on a successful journey toward a new, highly rewarding, and
sustainable networking career.
The CCNA program was created to provide a solid introduction not only to the Cisco
Internetwork Operating System (IOS) and Cisco hardware but also to internetworking in general,
making it helpful to you in areas that are not exclusively Cisco's. And regarding today's
certification process, it's not unrealistic that network managers—even those without Cisco
equipment—require Cisco certifications for their job applicants.
Rest assured that if you make it through the CCNA and are still interested in Cisco and
internetworking, you're headed down a path to certain success!
What Skills Do You Need to Become a CCNA R/S?
This ICND1 exam (100-105) tests a candidate for the knowledge and skills required to
successfully install, operate, and troubleshoot a small branch office network. The exam includes
questions on the operation of IP data networks, LAN switching technologies, IPv6, IP routing
technologies, IP services, network device security, and basic troubleshooting. The ICND2 exam
(exam 200-105) tests a candidate for the knowledge and skills required to successfully install,

operate, and troubleshoot a small- to medium-size enterprise branch network. The exam
includes questions on LAN switching technologies, IP routing technologies, security,
troubleshooting, and WAN technologies.
How Do You Become a CCNA R/S
If you want to go straight for our CCNA R/S and take only one exam, all you have to do is pass
the CCNA Composite exam (200-125). Oh, but don't you wish it were that easy? True, it's just
one test, but it's a whopper, and to pass it you must possess enough knowledge to understand
what the test writers are saying, and you need to know everything I mentioned previously, in the
sections on the ICND1 and ICND2 exams! Hey, it's hard, but it can be done!
What does the CCNA Composite exam (200-125) cover? Pretty much the same topics covered in
the ICND1 and ICND2 exams. Candidates can prepare for this exam by taking the Todd Lammle
authorized Cisco boot camps. 200-125 tests a candidate's knowledge and skills required to
install, operate, and troubleshoot a small- to medium-size enterprise branch network.
While you can take the Composite exam to get your CCNA, it's good to know that Cisco offers the
two-step process I discussed earlier in this Introduction. And this book covers both those exams
too! It may be easier than taking that one ginormous exam for you, but don't think the two-test
method is easy. It takes work! However, it can be done; you just need to stick with your studies.
The two-test method involves passing the following:
Exam 100-105: Interconnecting Cisco Networking Devices Part 1 (ICND1)
Exam 200-105: Interconnecting Cisco Networking Devices Part 2 (ICND2)
I can't stress this point enough: It's critical that you have some hands-on experience with Cisco
routers. If you can get a hold of some basic routers and switches, you're set, but if you can't, I've
worked hard to provide hundreds of configuration examples throughout this book to help
network administrators, or people who want to become network administrators, learn the skills
they need to pass the CCENT and CCNA R/S exams.
For Cisco certification hands-on training with CCSI Todd Lammle, please see:
www.lammle.com/ccna
. Each student will get hands-on experience by configuring at least
three routers and two switches.no sharing of equipment!

What Does This Book Cover?
This book covers everything you need to know to pass the ICND1 (100-105) and ICND2 (200-
105) exams, as well as the CCNA Composite (200-125) exam. But regardless of which path you
choose, as I've said, taking plenty of time to study and practice with routers or a router simulator
is the real key to success.
You will learn the following information in this book:
Chapter 1: Internetworking
   Chapters 1.14 map to the ICND1 exam. In Chapter 1, you will
learn the basics of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model the way Cisco wants you to
learn it. There are written labs and plenty of review questions to help you. Do not even think of
skipping the fundamental written labs in this chapter!
Chapter 2: Ethernet Networking and Data Encapsulation
   This chapter will provide
you with the Ethernet foundation you need in order to pass both the CCENT and CCNA exams.
Data encapsulation is discussed in detail in this chapter as well. And as with the other chapters,
this chapter includes written labs and review questions to help you.
Chapter 3: Introduction to TCP/IP
   This chapter provides you with the background
necessary for success on the exam, as well as in the real world with a thorough presentation of
TCP/IP. This in-depth chapter covers the very beginnings of the Internet Protocol stack and
goes all the way to IP addressing and understanding the difference between a network address
and a broadcast address before finally ending with network troubleshooting.
Chapter 4: Easy Subnetting
   You'll actually be able to subnet a network in your head after
reading this chapter if you really want to! And you'll find plenty of help in this chapter as long as
you don't skip the written labs and review questions at the end.
Chapter 5: VLSMs, Summarization, and Troubleshooting TCP/IP
 Here, you'll find out
all about variable length subnet masks (VLSMs) and how to design a network using VLSMs. This
chapter will finish with summarization techniques and configurations. As with Chapter 4, plenty
of help is there for you if you don't skip the written lab and review questions.
Chapter 6: Cisco's Internetworking Operating System (IOS)
   This chapter introduces
you to the Cisco Internetworking Operating System (IOS) and command-line interface (CLI). In
this chapter you'll learn how to turn on a router and configure the basics of the IOS, including
setting passwords, banners, and more. Hands-on labs will help you gain a firm grasp of the
concepts taught in the chapter. Before you go through the hands-on labs, be sure to complete the
written lab and review questions.
Chapter 7: Managing a Cisco Internetwork
   This chapter provides you with the
management skills needed to run a Cisco IOS network. Backing up and restoring the IOS, as well
as router configuration, are covered, as are the troubleshooting tools necessary to keep a
network up and running. As always, before tackling the hands-on labs in this chapter, complete
the written labs and review questions.
Chapter 8: Managing Cisco Devices
   This chapter describes the boot process of Cisco
routers, the configuration register, and how to manage Cisco IOS files. The chapter finishes with
a section on Cisco's new licensing strategy for IOS. Hands-on and written labs, along with review
questions, will help you build a strong foundation for the objectives covered in this chapter.
Chapter 9: IP Routing
   This is a fun chapter because we will begin to build our network, add
IP addresses, and route data between routers. You will also learn about static, default, and
dynamic routing using RIP and RIPv2. Hands-on labs, a written lab, and the review questions will
help you fully nail down IP routing.
Chapter 10: Layer 2 Switching
 This chapter sets you up with the solid background you need
on layer 2 switching, how switches perform address learning and make forwarding and filtering
decisions. In addition, switch port security with MAC addresses is covered in detail. As always,
go through the hands-on labs, written lab, and review questions to make sure you've really got

layer 2 switching down!
Chapter 11: VLANs and Inter-VLAN Routing
 Here I cover virtual VLANs and how to use
them in your internetwork. This chapter covers the nitty-gritty of VLANs and the different
concepts and protocols used with VLANs. I'll also guide you through
 troubleshooting techniques
in this all-important chapter. The hands-on labs, written lab, and review questions are there to
reinforce the VLAN material.
Chapter 12: Security
   This chapter covers security and access lists, which are created on
routers to filter the network. IP standard, extended, and named access lists are covered in detail.
Written and hands-on labs, along with review questions, will help you study for the security and
access-list portion of the Cisco exams.
Chapter 13: Network Address Translation (NAT)
   New information, commands,
troubleshooting, and detailed hands-on labs will help you nail the NAT CCENT objectives.
Chapter 14: Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6)
   This is a fun chapter chock-full of some
great information. IPv6 is not the big, bad scary creature that most people think it is, and it's a
really important objective on the latest exam, so study this chapter carefully—don't just skim it.
And make sure you hit those hands-on labs hard!
Chapter 15: Enhanced Switched Technologies
   Chapter 15 is the first chapter of Part 2 of
this book, which maps to the ICND2 exam. This chapter will start off with STP protocols and
dive into the fundamentals, covering the modes, as well as the various flavors of STP. VLANs,
trunks, and troubleshooting are covered as well. EtherChannel technologies, configuration, and
verification are also covered. There are hands-on labs, a written lab, and plenty of review
questions to help you. Do not even think of skipping the fundamental written and hands-on labs
in this chapter!
Chapter 16: Network Device Management and Security Managing Cisco Devices
  
This chapter describes the boot process of Cisco routers, the configuration register, and how to
manage Cisco IOS files. The chapter finishes with a section on Cisco's new licensing strategy for
its IOS. Hands-on and written labs, along with review questions, will help you build a strong
foundation for the objectives covered in this chapterhow to mitigate threats at the access layer
using various security techniques. AAA with RADIUIS and TACACS+, SNMP and HSRP are also
covered in this chapter. Don't skip the hands-on labs that are included, as well as a written lab and
review questions at the end of the chapter.
Chapter 17: Enhanced IGRP
 EIGRP was not covered in the ICND1 (CCENT) chapters, so this
is a full chapter on nothing but EIGRP and EIGRPv6. There are lots of examples, including
configuration, verification, and troubleshooting labs, with both IP and with IPv6. Great hands-on
labs are included, as well as a written lab and review questions.
Chapter 18: Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)
   Chapter 9 dives into more complex
dynamic routing by covering OSPF routing. The written lab, hands-on labs, and review questions
will help you master this vital routing protocol.
Chapter 19: Multi-Area OSPF
   The ICND1 (CCENT) portion of this book had a large chapter
on OSPF, so before reading this chapter, be sure you have the CCENT objectives down pat with a
strong OSPF foundation. This chapter will take off where that ICND1 chapter left off and add
multi-area networks along with advanced configurations and then finish with OSPv3. Hands-on
labs, a written lab, and challenging review questions await you at the end of the chapter.
Chapter 20: Troubleshooting IP, IPv6, and VLANs
   I want to say this is the most
important chapter in the book, but that's hard to say. You can decide that yourself when you take
the exam! Be sure to go through all the troubleshooting steps for IP, IPv6, and VLANs. The
hands-on labs for this chapter will be included in the free bonus material and dynamic labs that
I'll write and change as needed. Don't skip the written lab and review questions.
Chapter 21: Wide Area Networks
   This is the longest, and last, chapter in the book. It
covers multiple protocols in depth, especially HDLC, PPP, and Frame Relay, along with a
discussion on many other technologies. Good troubleshooting examples are provided in the PPP

and Frame Relay configuration sections, and these cannot be skipped! Hands-on labs meant to
focus squarely on the objectives are included at the end of the chapter, as well as a written lab
and challenging review questions.
Chapter 22: Evolution of Intelligent Networks
   I saved the hardest chapter for last. What
makes this chapter challenging is that there is no configuration section to you really need to dive
deep into the cloud, APIC-EM and QoS sections with an open and ready mind. I stuck as close to
the objectives as possible in order to help you ace the exam. The written lab and review questions
are spot on for the objectives.
Appendix A: Answers to Written Labs
   This appendix contains the answers to the book's
written labs.
Appendix B: Answers to Chapter Review Questions
   This appendix provides the answers
to the end-of-chapter review questions.
Appendix C: Disabling and Configuring Network Services
 Appendix C takes a look at
the basic services you should disable on your routers to make your network less of a target for
denial of service (DoS) attacks and break-in attempts.
Be sure to check the announcements section of my forum to find out how to
download bonus material I created specifically for this book.
What's Available Online?
I have worked hard to provide some really great tools to help you with your certification
process. All of the following tools, most of them available at 
www.wiley.com/go/sybextestprep
,
should be loaded on your workstation when you're studying for the test. As a fantastic bonus, I
was able to add to the download link a preview section from my CCNA video series! Please
understand that these are not the full versions, but they're still a great value for you included free
with this book.
Test Preparation Software
   The test preparation software prepares you to pass the ICND1
and ICND2 exams and the CCNA R/S Composite exam. You'll find all the review and assessment
questions from the book plus additional practice exam questions that appear exclusively from
the downloadable study tools.
Electronic Flashcards
   The companion study tools include over 200 flashcards specifically
written to hit you hard, so don't get discouraged if you don't ace your way through them at first!
They're there to ensure that you're really ready for the exam. And no worries—armed with the
review questions, practice exams, and flashcards, you'll be more than prepared when exam day
comes!
Glossary
   A complete glossary of CCENT, ICND2, CCNA R/S and Cisco routing terms is
available at 
www.wiley.com/go/sybextestprep
.
Todd Lammle Bonus Material and Labs
   Be sure to check the announcement section of
my forum at 
www.lammle.com/ccna
 for directions on how to download all the latest bonus
material created specifically to help you study for your ICND1, ICND2, and CCNA R/S exams.
Todd Lammle Videos
   I have created a full CCNA series of videos that can be purchased at
www.lammle.com/ccna
How to Use This Book
If you want a solid foundation for the serious effort of preparing for the Interconnecting Cisco
Network Devices Part 1 and 2 exams, or the CCNA R/S Composite exam, then look no further.
I've spent hundreds of hours putting together this book with the sole intention of helping you to

pass the Cisco exams, as well as really learn how to correctly configure Cisco routers and
switches!
This book is loaded with valuable information, and you will get the most out of your study time if
you understand why the book is organized the way it is.
So to maximize your benefit from this book, I recommend the following study method:
1
. 
Take the assessment test that's provided at the end of this introduction. (The answers are at
the end of the test.) It's okay if you don't know any of the answers; that's why you bought this
book! Carefully read over the explanations for any questions you get wrong and note the
chapters in which the material relevant to them is covered. This information should help you
plan your study strategy.
2
. 
Study each chapter carefully, making sure you fully understand the information and the test
objectives listed at the beginning of each one. Pay extra-close attention to any chapter that
includes material covered in questions you missed.
3
. 
Complete the written labs at the end of each chapter. (Answers to these appear in Appendix
A.) Do not skip these written exercises because they directly relate to the Cisco exams and
what you must glean from the chapters in which they appear. Do not just skim these labs!
Make sure you completely understand the reason for each correct answer.
4
. 
Complete all hands-on labs in each chapter, referring to the text of the chapter so that you
understand the reason for each step you take. Try to get your hands on some real equipment,
but if you don't have Cisco equipment available, try the LammleSim IOS version, which you
can use for the hands-on labs found only in this book. These labs will equip you with
everything you need for all your Cisco certification goals.
5
. 
Answer all of the review questions related to each chapter. (The answers appear in Appendix
B.) Note the questions that confuse you, and study the topics they cover again until the
concepts are crystal clear. And again—do not just skim these questions! Make sure you fully
comprehend the reason for each correct answer. Remember that these will not be the exact
questions you will find on the exam, but they're written to help you understand the chapter
material and ultimately pass the exam!
6
. 
Try your hand at the practice questions that are exclusive to this book. The questions can be
found only at 
www.wiley.com/go/sybextestprep
. And be sure to check out
www.lammle.com/ccna
 for the most up-to-date Cisco exam prep questions, videos, Todd
Lammle boot camps, and more.
7
. 
Test yourself using all the flashcards, which are also found on the download link. These are
brand-new and updated flashcards to help you prepare for the CCNA R/S exam and a
wonderful study tool!
To learn every bit of the material covered in this book, you'll have to apply yourself regularly,
and with discipline. Try to set aside the same time period every day to study, and select a
comfortable and quiet place to do so. I'm confident that if you work hard, you'll be surprised at
how quickly you learn this material!
If you follow these steps and really study—
doing hands-on labs every single day
 in addition to
using the review questions, the practice exams, the Todd Lammle video sections, and the
electronic flashcards, as well as all the written labs—it would actually be hard to fail the Cisco
exams. But understand that studying for the Cisco exams is a lot like getting in shape—if you do
not go to the gym every day, it's not going to happen!
Where Do You Take the Exams?
You may take the ICND1, ICND2, or CCNA R/S Composite or any Cisco exam at any of the
Pearson VUE authorized testing centers. For information, check 
www.vue.com
 or call 877-404-
EXAM (3926).

To register for a Cisco exam, follow these steps:
1
. 
Determine the number of the exam you want to take. (The ICND1 exam number is 100-105,
ICND2 is 100-205, and CCNA R/S Composite is 200-125.)
2
. 
Register with the nearest Pearson VUE testing center. At this point, you will be asked to pay
in advance for the exam. At the time of this writing, the ICND1 and ICND2 exams are $150,
and the CCNA R/S Composite exam is $250. The exams must be taken within one year of
payment. You can schedule exams up to six weeks in advance or as late as the day you want to
take it—but if you fail a Cisco exam, you must wait five days before you will be allowed to
retake it. If something comes up and you need to cancel or reschedule your exam
appointment, contact Pearson VUE at least 24 hours in advance.
3
. 
When you schedule the exam, you'll get instructions regarding all appointment and
cancellation procedures, the ID requirements, and information about the testing-center
location.
Tips for Taking Your Cisco Exams
The Cisco exams contain about 40-50 questions and must be completed in about 90 minutes or
less. This information can change per exam. You must get a score of about 85 percent to pass this
exam, but again, each exam can be different.
Many questions on the exam have answer choices that at first glance look identical—especially
the syntax questions! So remember to read through the choices carefully because close just
doesn't cut it. If you get commands in the wrong order or forget one measly character, you'll get
the question wrong. So, to practice, do the hands-on exercises at the end of this book's chapters
over and over again until they feel natural to you.
Also, never forget that the right answer is the Cisco answer. In many cases, more than one
appropriate answer is presented, but the 
correct
 answer is the one that Cisco recommends. On
the exam, you will always be told to pick one, two, or three options, never "choose all that apply."
The Cisco exam may include the following test formats:
Multiple-choice single answer
Multiple-choice multiple answer
Drag-and-drop
Router simulations
Cisco proctored exams will not show the steps to follow in completing a router interface
configuration, but they do allow partial command responses. For example, 
show run, sho running
,
or 
sh running-config
 would be acceptable.
Here are some general tips for exam success:
Arrive early at the exam center so you can relax and review your study materials.
Read the questions 
carefully
. Don't jump to conclusions. Make sure you're clear about
exactly what each question asks. "Read twice, answer once," is what I always tell my students.
When answering multiple-choice questions that you're not sure about, use the process of
elimination to get rid of the obviously incorrect answers first. Doing this greatly improves
your odds if you need to make an educated guess.
You can no longer move forward and backward through the Cisco exams, so doublecheck
your answer before clicking Next since you can't change your mind.
After you complete an exam, you'll get immediate, online notification of your pass or fail status,
a printed examination score report that indicates your pass or fail status, and your exam results
by section. (The test administrator will give you the printed score report.) Test scores are
automatically forwarded to Cisco within five working days after you take the test, so you don't
need to send your score to them. If you pass the exam, you'll receive confirmation from Cisco,

typically within two to four weeks, sometimes a bit longer.
Objective Map for CCNA Routing and Switching
Certification Exam
We've provided this objective map to help you locate where objectives for the CCNA Routing
and Switching certification exams are covered in each chapter. Please refer to it when you want
to find an objective quickly.
ICND1 Exam Objectives
Exam objectives are subject to change at any time without prior notice and at Cisco's sole
discretion. Please visit Cisco's certification website (
www.cisco.com/web/learning
) for the latest
information on the ICND1 Exam 100-105.
Table I.1
 20% 1.0 Network Fundamentals
Objective
Chapter(s)
1.1 Compare and contrast OSI and TCP/IP models
3
1.2 Compare and contrast TCP and UDP protocols
3
1.3 Describe the impact of infrastructure components in an enterprise network
1
1.3.a Firewalls
1
1.3.b Access points
1
1.3.c Wireless controllers
1
1.4 Compare and contrast collapsed core and three-tier architectures
2
1.5 Compare and contrast network topologies
1
1.5.a Star
1
1.5.b Mesh
1
1.5.c Hybrid
1
1.6 Select the appropriate cabling type based on implementation requirements
2
1.7 Apply troubleshooting methodologies to resolve problems
3
,
5
1.7.a Perform fault isolation and document
3
,
5
1.7.b Resolve or escalate
3
,
5
1.7.c Verify and monitor resolution
3
,
5
1.8 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot IPv4 addressing and subnetting
4
,
5
1.9 Compare and contrast IPv4 address types
3
1.9.a Unicast
3
1.9.b Broadcast
3
1.9.c Multicast
3
1.10 Describe the need for private IPv4 addressing
3
1.11 Identify the appropriate IPv6 addressing scheme to satisfy addressing
requirements in a LAN/WAN environment
14
1.12 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot IPv6 addressing
14
1.13 Configure and verify IPv6 Stateless Address Auto Configuration
14
1.14 Compare and contrast IPv6 address types
14

1.14.a Global unicast
14
1.14.b Unique local
14
1.14.c Link local
14
1.14.d Multicast
14
1.14.e Modified EUI 64
14
1.14.f Autoconfiguration
14
1.14.g Anycast
14
Table I.2
 26% 2.0 LAN Switching Fundamentals
Objective
Chapter(s)
2.1 Describe and verify switching concepts
10
2.1.a MAC learning and aging
10
2.1.b Frame switching
10
2.1.c Frame flooding
10
2.1.d MAC address table
10
2.2 Interpret Ethernet frame format
2
2.3 Troubleshoot interface and cable issues (collisions, errors, duplex, speed)
6
2.4 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot VLANs (normal range) spanning multiple
switches
11
2.4.a Access ports (data and voice)
11
2.4.b Default VLAN
11
2.5 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot interswitch connectivity
11
2.5.a Trunk ports
11
2.5.b 802.1Q
11
2.5.c Native VLAN
11
2.6 Configure and verify Layer 2 protocols
7
2.6.a Cisco Discovery Protocol
7
2.6.b LLDP
7
2.7 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot port security
10
2.7.a Static
10
2.7.b Dynamic
10
2.7.c Sticky
10
2.7.d Max MAC addresses
10
2.7.e Violation actions
10
2.7.f Err-disable recovery
10
Table I.3
 25% 3.0 Routing Fundamentals
Objective
Chapter(s)
3.1 Describe the routing concepts
9
3.1.a Packet handling along the path through a network
9
3.1.b Forwarding decision based on route lookup
9

3.1.c Frame rewrite
9
3.2 Interpret the components of routing table
9
3.2.a Prefix
9
3.2.b Network mask
9
3.2.c Next hop
9
3.2.d Routing protocol code
9
3.2.e Administrative distance
9
3.2.f Metric
9
3.2.g Gateway of last resort
9
3.3 Describe how a routing table is populated by different routing information
sources
9
3.3.a Admin distance
9
3.4 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot inter-VLAN routing
11
3.4.a Router on a stick
11
3.5 Compare and contrast static routing and dynamic routing
9
3.6 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot IPv4 and IPv6 static routing
9
3.6.a Default route
9
,
14
3.6.b Network route
9
3.6.c Host route
9
3.6.d Floating static
9
3.7 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot RIPv2 for IPv4 (excluding
authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution)
9
Table I.4
 15% 4.0 Infrastructure Services
Objective
Chapter(s)
4.1 Describe DNS lookup operation
7
4.2 Troubleshoot client connectivity issues involving DNS
7
4.3 Configure and verify DHCP on a router (excluding static reservations)
7
4.3.a Server
7
4.3.b Relay
7
4.3.c Client
7
4.3.d TFTP, DNS, and gateway options
7
4.4 Troubleshoot client- and router-based DHCP connectivity issues
7
4.5 Configure and verify NTP operating in client/server mode
7
4.6 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot IPv4 standard numbered and named
access list for routed interfaces
12
4.7 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot inside source NAT
13
4.7.a Static
13
4.7.b Pool
13
4.7.c PAT
13

Table I.5
 14% 5.0 Infrastructure Maintenance
Objective
Chapter(s)
5.1 Configure and verify device-monitoring using syslog
7
5.2 Configure and verify device management
7
,
8
5.2.a Backup and restore device configuration
7
5.2.b Using Cisco Discovery Protocol and LLDP for device discovery
7
5.2.c Licensing
8
5.2.d Logging
7
5.2.e Timezone
7
5.2.f Loopback
7
5.3 Configure and verify initial device configuration
6
5.4 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot basic device hardening
6
5.4.a Local authentication
6
5.4.b Secure password
6
5.4.c Access to device
6
5.4.c. (i) Source address
6
5.4.c. (ii) Telnet/SSH
6
5.4.d Login banner
6
5.5 Perform device maintenance
6
,
8
5.5.a Cisco IOS upgrades and recovery (SCP, FTP, TFTP, and MD5 verify)
8
5.5.b Password recovery and configuration register
8
5.5.c File system management
8
5.6 Use Cisco IOS tools to troubleshoot and resolve problems
6
5.6.a Ping and traceroute with extended option
6
5.6.b Terminal monitor
6
5.6.c Log events
6
ICND2 Exam Objectives
Exam objectives are subject to change at any time without prior notice and at Cisco's sole
discretion. Please visit Cisco's certification website (
www.cisco.com/web/learning
) for the latest
information on the ICND2 Exam 200-105.
Table I.6
 26% 1.0 LAN Switching Technologies
Objective
Chapter(s)
1.1 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot VLANs (normal/extended range) spanning
multiple switches
15
1.1.a Access ports (data and voice)
15
1.1.b Default VLAN
15
1.2 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot interswitch connectivity
15
1.2.a Add and remove VLANs on a trunk
15

1.2.b DTP and VTP (v1&v2)
15
1.3 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot STP protocols
15
1.3.a STP mode (PVST+ and RPVST+)
15
1.3.b STP root bridge selection
15
1.4 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot STP-related optional features
15
1.4.a PortFast
15
1.4.b BPDU guard
15
1.5 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot (Layer 2/Layer 3) EtherChannel
15
1.5.a Static
15
1.5.b PAGP
15
1.5.c LACP
15
1.6 Describe the benefits of switch stacking and chassis aggregation
22
1.7 Describe common access layer threat mitigation techniques
15
,
16
,
20
1.7.a 802.1x
16
1.7.b DHCP snooping
16
1.7.c Nondefault native VLAN
15, 20
Table I.7
 29% 2.0 Routing Technologies
Objective
Chapter(s)
2.1 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot Inter-VLAN routing 1
15
2.1.a Router on a stick 1
15
2.1.b SVI 1
15
2.2 Compare and contrast distance vector and link-state routing protocols
17
,
18
,
19
2.3 Compare and contrast interior and exterior routing protocols
17
,
18
,
19
2.4 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot single area and multiarea OSPFv2 for
IPv4 (excluding authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution,
stub, virtual-link, and LSAs)
18
,
19
2.5 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot single area and multiarea OSPFv3 for
IPv6 (excluding authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution,
stub, virtual-link, and LSAs)
18
, 
19
2.6 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot EIGRP for IPv4 (excluding
authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution, stub)
17
2.7 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot EIGRP for IPv6 (excluding
authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution, stub)
17
Table I.8
 16% 3.0 WAN Technologies
Objective
Chapter(s)
3.1 Configure and verify PPP and MLPPP on WAN interfaces using local
authentication
21
3.2 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot PPPoE client-side interfaces using local
authentication
21
3.3 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot GRE tunnel connectivity
21
3.4 Describe WAN topology options
21

3.4.a Point-to-point
21
3.4.b Hub and spoke
21
3.4.c Full mesh
21
3.4.d Single vs dual-homed
21
3.5 Describe WAN access connectivity options
21
3.5.a MPLS
21
3.5.b MetroEthernet
21
3.5.c Broadband PPPoE
21
3.5.d Internet VPN (DMVPN, site-to-site VPN, client VPN)
21
3.6 Configure and verify single-homed branch connectivity using eBGP IPv4
(limited to peering and route advertisement using Network command only)
21
Table I.9
 14% 4.0 Infrastructure Services
Objective
Chapter(s)
4.1 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot basic HSRP
16
4.1.a Priority
16
4.1.b Preemption
16
4.1.c Version
16
4.2 Describe the effects of cloud resources on enterprise network architecture
22
4.2.a Traffic path to internal and external cloud services
22
4.2.b Virtual services
22
4.2.c Basic virtual network infrastructure
22
4.3 Describe basic QoS concepts
22
4.3.a Marking
22
4.3.b Device trust
22
4.3.c Prioritization
22
4.3.c. (i) Voice 4.3.c. (ii) Video 4.3.c. (iii) Data
22
4.3.d Shaping
22
4.3.e Policing
22
4.3.f Congestion management
22
4.4 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot IPv4 and IPv6 access list for traffic
filtering
20
4.4.a Standard
20
4.4.b Extended
20
4.4.c Named
20
4.5 Verify ACLs using the APIC-EM Path Trace ACL analysis tool
22
Table I.10
 15% 5.0 Infrastructure Maintenance
Objective
Chapter(s)
5.1 Configure and verify device-monitoring protocols
16
5.1.a SNMPv2
16

5.1.b SNMPv3
16
5.2 Troubleshoot network connectivity issues using ICMP echo-based IP SLA
20
5.3 Use local SPAN to troubleshoot and resolve problems
20
5.4 Describe device management using AAA with TACACS+ and RADIUS
16
5.5 Describe network programmability in enterprise network architecture
22
5.5.a Function of a controller
22
5.5.b Separation of control plane and data plane
22
5.5.c Northbound and southbound APIs
22
5.6 Troubleshoot basic Layer 3 end-to-end connectivity issues
22
CCNA Exam Objectives (Composite Exam)
Exam objectives are subject to change at any time without prior notice and at Cisco's sole
discretion. Please visit Cisco's certification website (
www.cisco.com/web/learning
) for the latest
information on the CCNA Exam 200-125.
Table I.11
 15% 1.0 Network Fundamentals
Objective
Chapter(s)
1.1 Compare and contrast OSI and TCP/IP models
3
1.2 Compare and contrast TCP and UDP protocols
3
1.3 Describe the impact of infrastructure components in an enterprise network
1
1.3.a Firewalls
1
1.3.b Access points
1
1.3.c Wireless controllers
1
1.4 Describe the effects of cloud resources on enterprise network architecture
22
1.4.a Traffic path to internal and external cloud services
22
1.4.b Virtual services
22
1.4.c Basic virtual network infrastructure
22
1.5 Compare and contrast collapsed core and three-tier architectures
2
1.6 Compare and contrast network topologies
1
1.6.a Star
1
1.6.b Mesh
1
1.6.c Hybrid
1
1.7 Select the appropriate cabling type based on implementation requirements
2
1.8 Apply troubleshooting methodologies to resolve problems
3
,
5
1.8.a Perform and document fault isolation
3
,
5
1.8.b Resolve or escalate
3
,
5
1.8.c Verify and monitor resolution
3
,
5
1.9 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot IPv4 addressing and subnetting
4
,
5
1.10 Compare and contrast IPv4 address types
3
1.10.a Unicast
3

1.10.b Broadcast
3
1.10.c Multicast
3
1.11 Describe the need for private IPv4 addressing
3
1.12 Identify the appropriate IPv6 addressing scheme to satisfy addressing
requirements in a LAN/WAN environment
14
1.13 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot IPv6 addressing
14
1.14 Configure and verify IPv6 Stateless Address Auto Configuration
14
1.15 Compare and contrast IPv6 address types
14
1.15.a Global unicast
14
1.15.b Unique local
14
1.15.c Link local
14
1.15.d Multicast
14
1.15.e Modified EUI 64
14
1.15.f Autoconfiguration
14
1.15.g Anycast
14
Table I.12
 21% 2.0 LAN Switching Technologies
Objective
Chapter(s)
2.1 Describe and verify switching concepts
10
2.1.a MAC learning and aging
10
2.1.b Frame switching
10
2.1.c Frame flooding
10
2.1.d MAC address table
10
2.2 Interpret Ethernet frame format
2
2.3 Troubleshoot interface and cable issues (collisions, errors, duplex, speed)
6
2.4 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot VLANs (normal/extended range)
spanning multiple switches
11
2.4.a Access ports (data and voice)
11
2.4.b Default VLAN
11
2.5 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot interswitch connectivity
11
2.5.a Trunk ports
11
2.5.b Add and remove VLANs on a trunk
15
2.5.c DTP, VTP (v1&v2), and 802.1Q
15
2.5.d Native VLAN
11
2.6 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot STP protocols
15
2.6.a STP mode (PVST+ and RPVST+)
15
2.6.b STP root bridge selection
15
2.7 Configure, verify and troubleshoot STP related optional features
15
2.7.a PortFast
15
2.7.b BPDU guard
15
2.8 Configure and verify Layer 2 protocols
7

2.8.a Cisco Discovery Protocol
7
2.8.b LLDP
7
2.9 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot (Layer 2/Layer 3) EtherChannel
15
2.9.a Static
15
2.9.b PAGP
15
2.9.c LACP
15
2.10 Describe the benefits of switch stacking and chassis aggregation
22
Table I.13
 23% 3.0 Routing Technologies
Objective
Chapter(s)
3.1 Describe the routing concepts
9
3.1.a Packet handling along the path through a network
9
3.1.b Forwarding decision based on route lookup
9
3.1.c Frame rewrite
9
3.2 Interpret the components of a routing table
9
3.2.a Prefix
9
3.2.b Network mask
9
3.2.c Next hop
9
3.2.d Routing protocol code
9
3.2.e Administrative distance
9
3.2.f Metric
9
3.2.g Gateway of last resort
9
3.3 Describe how a routing table is populated by different routing information
sources
9
3.3.a Admin distance
9
3.4 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot inter-VLAN routing
11
,
15
3.4.a Router on a stick
11
,
15
3.4.b SVI
15
3.5 Compare and contrast static routing and dynamic routing
9
3.6 Compare and contrast distance vector and link state routing protocols
17
,
18
,
19
3.7 Compare and contrast interior and exterior routing protocols
18
,
19
3.8 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot IPv4 and IPv6 static routing
9
3.8.a Default route
9
,
14
3.8.b Network route
9
3.8.c Host route
9
3.8.d Floating static
9
3.9 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot single area and multi-area OSPFv2 for
IPv4 (excluding authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution,
stub, virtual-link, and LSAs)
4
,
5
3.10 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot single area and multi-area OSPFv3 for
IPv6 (excluding authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution,
4
, 
5

stub, virtual-link, and LSAs)
3.11 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot EIGRP for IPv4 (excluding
authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution, stub)
3
3.12 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot EIGRP for IPv6 (excluding
authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution, stub)
3
3.13 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot RIPv2 for IPv4 (excluding
authentication, filtering, manual summarization, redistribution)
9
3.14 Troubleshoot basic Layer 3 end-to-end connectivity issues
7
Table I.14
 10% 4.0 WAN Technologies
Objective
Chapter(s)
4.1 Configure and verify PPP and MLPPP on WAN interfaces using local
authentication
21
4.2 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot PPPoE client-side interfaces using local
authentication
21
4.3 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot GRE tunnel connectivity
21
4.4 Describe WAN topology options
21
4.4.a Point-to-point
21
4.4.b Hub and spoke
21
4.4.c Full mesh
21
4.4.d Single vs dual-homed
21
4.5 Describe WAN access connectivity options
21
4.5.a MPLS
21
4.5.b Metro Ethernet
21
4.5.c Broadband PPPoE
21
4.5.d Internet VPN (DMVPN, site-to-site VPN, client VPN)
21
4.6 Configure and verify single-homed branch connectivity using eBGP IPv4
(limited to peering and route advertisement using Network command only)
21
4.7 Describe basic QoS concepts
22
4.7.a Marking
22
4.7.b Device trust
22
4.7.c Prioritization
22
4.7.c. (i) Voice
22
4.7.c. (ii) Video
22
4.7.c. (iii) Data
22
4.7.d Shaping
22
4.7.e Policing
22
4.7.f Congestion management
22
Table I.15
 10% 5.0 Infrastructure Services
Objective
Chapter(s)
5.1 Describe DNS lookup operation
7

5.2 Troubleshoot client connectivity issues involving DNS
7
5.3 Configure and verify DHCP on a router (excluding static reservations)
7
5.3.a Server
7
5.3.b Relay
7
5.3.c Client
7
5.3.d TFTP, DNS, and gateway options
7
5.4 Troubleshoot client- and router-based DHCP connectivity issues
7
5.5 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot basic HSRP
16
5.5.a Priority
16
5.5.b Preemption
16
5.5.c Version
16
5.6 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot inside source NAT
13
5.6.a Static
13
5.6.b Pool
13
5.6.c PAT
13
5.7 Configure and verify NTP operating in a client/server mode
7
Table I.16
 11% 6.0 Infrastructure Security
Objective
Chapter(s)
6.1 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot port security
10
6.1.a Static
10
6.1.b Dynamic
10
6.1.c Sticky
10
6.1.d Max MAC addresses
10
6.1.e Violation actions
10
6.1.f Err-disable recovery
10
6.2 Describe common access layer threat mitigation techniques
15
,
16
,
20
6.2.a 802.1x
16
6.2.b DHCP snooping
16
6.2.c Nondefault native VLAN
15
,
20
6.3 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot IPv4 and IPv6 access list for traffic
filtering
20
6.3.a Standard
20
6.3.b Extended
20
6.3.c Named
20
6.4 Verify ACLs using the APIC-EM Path Trace ACL Analysis tool
22
6.5 Configure, verify, and troubleshoot basic device hardening
6
6.5.a Local authentication
6
6.5.b Secure password
6
6.5.c Access to device
6

6.5.c. (i) Source address
6
6.5.c. (ii) Telnet/SSH
6
6.5.d Login banner
6
6.6 Describe device security using AAA with TACACS+ and RADIUS
16
Table I.17
 10% 7.0 Infrastructure Management
Objective
Chapter(s)
7.1 Configure and verify device-monitoring protocols
16
7.1.a SNMPv2
16
7.1.b SNMPv3
16
7.1.c Syslog
7
,
16
7.2 Troubleshoot network connectivity issues using ICMP echo-based IP SLA
20
7.3 Configure and verify device management
7
,
8
7.3.a Backup and restore device configuration
7
7.3.b Using Cisco Discovery Protocol or LLDP for device discovery
7
7.3.c Licensing
8
7.3.d Logging
7
7.3.e Timezone
7
7.3.f Loopback
7
7.4 Configure and verify initial device configuration
6
7.5 Perform device maintenance
6
,
8
7.5.a Cisco IOS upgrades and recovery (SCP, FTP, TFTP, and MD5 verify)
8
7.5.b Password recovery and configuration register
8
7.5.c File system management
8
7.6 Use Cisco IOS tools to troubleshoot and resolve problems
6
7.6.a Ping and traceroute with extended option
6
7.6.b Terminal monitor
6
7.6.c Log events
6
7.6.d Local SPAN
6
,
20
7.7 Describe network programmability in enterprise network architecture
22
7.7.a Function of a controller
22
7.7.b Separation of control plane and data plane
22
7.7.c Northbound and southbound APIs
22
*******************

Assessment Test
1
. 
What is the 
sys-id-ext
 field in a BPDU used for?
A
. 
It is a 4-bit field inserted into an Ethernet frame to define trunking information between
switches.
B
. 
It is a 12-bit field inserted into an Ethernet frame to define VLANs in an STP instance.
C
. 
It is a 4-bit field inserted into an non-Ethernet frame to define EtherChannel options.
D
. 
It is a 12-bit field inserted into an Ethernet frame to define STP root bridges.
2
. 
You have four RSTP PVST+ links between switches and want to aggregate the bandwidth.
What solution will you use?
A
. 
EtherChannel
B
. 
PortFast
C
. 
BPDU Channel
D
. 
VLANs
E
. 
EtherBundle
3
. 
What configuration parameters must be configured the same between switches for LACP to
form a channel? (Choose three.)
A
. 
Virtual MAC address
B
. 
Port speeds
C
. 
Duplex
D
. 
PortFast enabled
E
. 
Allowed VLAN information
4
. 
You reload a router with a configuration register setting of 0x2101. What will the router do
when it reloads?
A
. 
The router enters setup mode.
B
. 
The router enters ROM monitor mode.
C
. 
The router boots the mini-IOS in ROM.
D
. 
The router expands the first IOS in flash memory into RAM.
5
. 
Which of the following commands provides the product ID and serial number of a router?
A
. 
show license
B
. 
show license feature
C
. 
show version
D
. 
show license udi
6
. 
Which command allows you to view the technology options and licenses that are supported
on your router along with several status variables?
A
. 
show license
B
. 
show license feature
C
. 
show license udi
D
. 
show version
7
. 
Which of the following services provide the operating system and the network?
A
. 
IaaS

B
. 
PaaS
C
. 
SaaS
D
. 
none of the above
8
. 
You want to send a console message to a syslog server, but you only want to send status
messages of 3 and lower. Which of the following commands will you use?
A
. 
logging trap emergencies
B
. 
logging trap errors
C
. 
logging trap debugging
D
. 
logging trap notifications
E
. 
logging trap critical
F
. 
logging trap warnings
G
. 
logging trap alerts
9
. 
When stacking switches, which is true? (Choose 2)
A
. 
The stack is managed as multiple objects, and has a single management IP address
B
. 
The stack is managed as a single object, and has a single management IP address
C
. 
The master switch is chosen when you configure the first switches master algorithm to on
D
. 
The master switch is elected form one of the stack member switches
10
. 
You need to connect to a remote IPv6 server in your virtual server farm. You can connect to
the IPv4 servers, but not the critical IPv6 server you desperately need. Based on the
following output, what could your problem be?
C:\>
ipconfig
Connection-specific DNS Suffix . : localdomain
IPv6 Address. . . . . . . . . . . : 2001:db8:3c4d:3:ac3b:2ef:1823:8938
Temporary IPv6 Address. . . . . . : 2001:db8:3c4d:3:2f33:44dd:211:1c3d
Link-local IPv6 Address . . . . . : fe80::ac3b:2ef:1823:8938%11
IPv4 Address. . . . . . . . . . . : 10.1.1.10
Subnet Mask . . . . . . . . . . . : 255.255.255.0
Default Gateway
 . . . . . . . . . : 10.1.1.1
A
. 
The global address is in the wrong subnet.
B
. 
The IPv6 default gateway has not been configured or received from the router.
C
. 
The link-local address has not been resolved so the host cannot communicate to the
router.
D
. 
There are two IPv6 global addresses configured. One must be removed from the
configuration.
11
. 
What command is used to view the IPv6-to-MAC-address resolution table on a Cisco router?
A
. 
show ip arp
B
. 
show ipv6 arp
C
. 
show ip neighbors
D
. 
show ipv6 neighbors
E
. 
show arp
12
. 
An IPv6 ARP entry is listed as with a status of REACH. What can you conclude about the
IPv6-to-MAC-address mapping?
A
. 
The interface has communicated with the neighbor address and the mapping is current.
B
. 
The interface has not communicated within the neighbor reachable time frame.
C
. 
The ARP entry has timed out.

D
. 
IPv6 can reach the neighbor address but the addresses has not yet been resolved.
13
. 
Serial0/1 goes down. How will EIGRP send packets to the 10.1.1.0 network?
Corp#show ip eigrp topology
[output cut]
P 10.1.1.0/24, 2 successors, FD is 2681842
 via 10.1.2.2 (2681842/2169856), Serial0/0
 via 10.1.3.1 (2973467/2579243), Serial0/2
 via 10.1.3.3 (2681842/2169856), Serial0/1
A
. 
EIGRP will put the 10.1.1.0 network into active mode.
B
. 
EIGRP will drop all packets destined for 10.1.1.0.
C
. 
EIGRP will just keep sending packets out s0/0.
D
. 
EIGRP will use s0/2 as the successor and keep routing to 10.1.1.0.
14
. 
What command produced the following output?
via FE80::201:C9FF:FED0:3301 (29110112/33316), Serial0/0/0
via FE80::209:7CFF:FE51:B401 (4470112/42216), Serial0/0/1
via FE80::209:7CFF:FE51:B401 (2170112/2816), Serial0/0/2
A
. 
show ip protocols
B
. 
show ipv6 protocols
C
. 
show ip eigrp neighbors
D
. 
show ipv6 eigrp neighbors
E
. 
show ip eigrp topology
F
. 
show ipv6 eigrp topology
15
. 
You need to troubleshoot an adjacency between two EIGRP configured routers? What should
you look for? (Choose four.)
A
. 
Verify the AS numbers.
B
. 
Verify that you have the proper interfaces enabled for EIGRP.
C
. 
Make sure there are no mismatched K-values.
D
. 
Check your passive interface settings.
E
. 
Make sure your remote routers are not connected to the Internet.
F
. 
If authentication is configured, make sure all routers use different passwords.
16
. 
You have two OSPF directly configured routers that are not forming an adjacency. What
should you check? (Choose three.)
A
. 
Process ID
B
. 
Hello and dead timers
C
. 
Link cost
D
. 
Area
E
. 
IP address/subnet mask
17
. 
When do two adjacent routers-enter the 2WAY state?
A
. 
After both routers have received Hello information
B
. 
After they have exchanged topology databases
C
. 
When they connect only to a DR or BDR
D
. 
When they need to exchange RID information
18
. 
Which type of LSAs are generated by ABRs and referred to summary link advertisements

(SLAs)?
A
. 
Type 1
B
. 
Type 2
C
. 
Type 3
D
. 
Type 4
E
. 
Type 5
19
. 
Which of the following is not provided by the AH portion of IPsec?
A
. 
Integrity
B
. 
Confidentiality
C
. 
Authenticity
D
. 
Anti-reply
20
. 
Which statement about GRE is not true?
A
. 
GRE is stateless and has no flow control.
B
. 
GRE has security.
C
. 
GRE has additional overhead for tunneled packets, at least 24 bytes.
D
. 
GRE uses a protocol-type field in the GRE header so any layer 3 protocol can be used
through the tunnel.
21
. 
Which QoS mechanism will drop traffic if a session uses more than the allotted bandwidth?
A
. 
Congestion management
B
. 
Shaping
C
. 
Policing
D
. 
Marking
22
. 
IPv6 unicast routing is running on the Corp router. Which of the following addresses would
show up with the show ipv6 int brief command?
Corp#
sh int f0/0
FastEthernet0/0 is up, line protocol is up
 Hardware is AmdFE, address is 000d.bd3b.0d80 (bia 000d.bd3b.0d80)
[output cut]
A
. 
FF02::3c3d:0d:bdff:fe3b:0d80
B
. 
FE80::3c3d:2d:bdff:fe3b:0d80
C
. 
FE80::3c3d:0d:bdff:fe3b:0d80
D
. 
FE80::3c3d:2d:ffbd:3bfe:0d80
23
. 
A host sends a type of NDP message providing the MAC address that was requested. Which
type of NDP was sent?
A
. 
NA
B
. 
RS
C
. 
RA
D
. 
NS
24
. 
Each field in an IPv6 address is how many bits long?
A
. 
4
B
. 
16
C
. 
32

D
. 
128
25
. 
To enable OSPFv3, which of the following would you use?
A
. 
Router(config-if)#
ipv6 ospf 10 area 0.0.0.0
B
. 
Router(config-if)#
ipv6 router rip 1
C
. 
Router(config)#
ipv6 router eigrp 10
D
. 
Router(config-rtr)#
no shutdown
E
. 
Router(config-if)#
ospf ipv6 10 area 0
26
. 
What does the command 
routerA(config)#
line cons 0
 allow you to perform next?
A
. 
Set the Telnet password.
B
. 
Shut down the router.
C
. 
Set your console password.
D
. 
Disable console connections.
27
. 
Which two statements describe the IP address 10.16.3.65/23? (Choose two.)
A
. 
The subnet address is 10.16.3.0 255.255.254.0.
B
. 
The lowest host address in the subnet is 10.16.2.1 255.255.254.0.
C
. 
The last valid host address in the subnet is 10.16.2.254 255.255.254.0.
D
. 
The broadcast address of the subnet is 10.16.3.255 255.255.254.0.
E
. 
The network is not subnetted.
28
. 
On which interface do you configure an IP address for a switch?
A
. 
int fa0/0
B
. 
int vty 0 15
C
. 
int vlan 1
D
. 
int s/0/0
29
. 
Which of the following is the valid host range for the subnet on which the IP address
192.168.168.188 255.255.255.192 resides?
A
. 
192.168.168.129–190
B
. 
192.168.168.129–191
C
. 
192.168.168.128–190
D
. 
192.168.168.128–192
30
. 
Which of the following is considered to be the inside host's address after translation?
A
. 
Inside local
B
. 
Outside local
C
. 
Inside global
D
. 
Outside global
31
. 
Your inside locals are not being translated to the inside global addresses. Which of the
following commands will show you if your inside globals are allowed to use the NAT pool?
ip nat pool Corp 198.18.41.129 198.18.41.134 netmask 255.255.255.248
ip nat inside source list 100 int pool Corp overload
A
. 
debug ip nat
B
. 
show access-list

C
. 
show ip nat translation
D
. 
show ip nat statistics
32
. 
How many collision domains are created when you segment a network with a 12-port switch?
A
. 
1
B
. 
2
C
. 
5
D
. 
12
33
. 
Which of the following commands will allow you to set your Telnet password on a Cisco
router?
A
. 
line telnet 0 4
B
. 
line aux 0 4
C
. 
line vty 0 4
D
. 
line con 0
34
. 
Which router command allows you to view the entire contents of all access lists?
A
. 
show all access-lists
B
. 
show access-lists
C
. 
show ip interface
D
. 
show interface
35
. 
What does a VLAN do?
A
. 
Acts as the fastest port to all servers
B
. 
Provides multiple collision domains on one switch port
C
. 
Breaks up broadcast domains in a layer 2 switch internetwork
D
. 
Provides multiple broadcast domains within a single collision domain
36
. 
If you wanted to delete the configuration stored in NVRAM, choose the best answer for the
Cisco objectives.
A
. 
erase startup
B
. 
delete running
C
. 
erase flash
D
. 
erase running
37
. 
Which protocol is used to send a destination network unknown message back to originating
hosts?
A
. 
TCP
B
. 
ARP
C
. 
ICMP
D
. 
BootP
38
. 
Which class of IP address provides 15 bits for subnetting?
A
. 
A
B
. 
B
C
. 
C
D
. 
D

39
. 
There are three possible routes for a router to reach a destination network. The first route is
from OSPF with a metric of 782. The second route is from RIPv2 with a metric of 4. The third
is from EIGRP with a composite metric of 20514560. Which route will be installed by the
router in its routing table?
A
. 
RIPv2
B
. 
EIGRP
C
. 
OSPF
D
. 
All three
40
. 
Which one of the following is true regarding VLANs?
A
. 
Two VLANs are configured by default on all Cisco switches.
B
. 
VLANs only work if you have a complete Cisco switched internetwork. No off-brand
switches are allowed.
C
. 
You should not have more than 10 switches in the same VTP domain.
D
. 
You need to have a trunk link configured between switches in order to send information
about more than one VLAN down the link.
41
. 
Which two of the following commands will place network 10.2.3.0/24 into area 0? (Choose
two.)
A
. 
router eigrp 10
B
. 
router ospf 10
C
. 
router rip
D
. 
network 10.0.0.0
E
. 
network 10.2.3.0 255.255.255.0 area 0
F
. 
network 10.2.3.0 0.0.0.255 area0
G
. 
network 10.2.3.0 0.0.0.255 area 0
42
. 
How many broadcast domains are created when you segment a network with a 12-port
switch?
A
. 
1
B
. 
2
C
. 
5
D
. 
12
43
. 
If routers in a single area are configured with the same priority value, what value does a
router use for the OSPF router ID in the absence of a loopback interface?
A
. 
The lowest IP address of any physical interface
B
. 
The highest IP address of any physical interface
C
. 
The lowest IP address of any logical interface
D
. 
The highest IP address of any logical interface
44
. 
What protocols are used to configure trunking on a switch? (Choose two.)
A
. 
VLAN Trunking Protocol
B
. 
VLAN
C
. 
802.1q
D
. 
ISL
45
. 
What is a stub network?

A
. 
A network with more than one exit point
B
. 
A network with more than one exit and entry point
C
. 
A network with only one entry and no exit point
D
. 
A network that has only one entry and exit point
46
. 
Where is a hub specified in the OSI model?
A
. 
Session layer
B
. 
Physical layer
C
. 
Data Link layer
D
. 
Application layer
47
. 
What are the two main types of access control lists (ACLs)? (Choose two.)
A
. 
Standard
B
. 
IEEE
C
. 
Extended
D
. 
Specialized
48
. 
Which of the following is the best summarization of the following networks: 192.168.128.0
through 192.168.159.0?
A
. 
192.168.0.0/24
B
. 
192.168.128.0/16
C
. 
192.168.128.0/19
D
. 
192.168.128.0/20
49
. 
What command is used to create a backup configuration?
A
. 
copy running backup
B
. 
copy running-config startup-config
C
. 
config mem
D
. 
wr net
50
. 
1000Base-T is which IEEE standard?
A
. 
802.3f
B
. 
802.3z
C
. 
802.3ab
D
. 
802.3ae
51
. 
Which protocol does DHCP use at the Transport layer?
A
. 
IP
B
. 
TCP
C
. 
UDP
D
. 
ARP
52
. 
If your router is facilitating a CSU/DSU, which of the following commands do you need to use
to provide the router with a 64000 bps serial link?
A
. 
RouterA(config)#bandwidth 64
B
. 
RouterA(config-if)#bandwidth 64000
C
. 
RouterA(config)#clockrate 64000

D
. 
RouterA(config-if)#clock rate 64
E
. 
RouterA(config-if)#clock rate 64000
53
. 
Which command is used to determine if an access list is enabled on a particular interface?
A
. 
show access-lists
B
. 
show interface
C
. 
show ip interface
D
. 
show interface access-lists
54
. 
Which of the following statements is true with regard to ISL and 802.1q?
A
. 
802.1q encapsulates the frame with control information; ISL inserts an ISL field along
with tag control information.
B
. 
802.1q is Cisco proprietary.
C
. 
ISL encapsulates the frame with control information; 802.1q inserts an 802.1q field along
with tag control information.
D
. 
ISL is a standard.
55
. 
The protocol data unit (PDU) encapsulation is completed in which order?
A
. 
Bits, frames, packets, segments, data
B
. 
Data, bits, segments, frames, packets
C
. 
Data, segments, packets, frames, bits
D
. 
Packets, frames, bits, segments, data
56
. 
Based on the configuration shown below, what statement is true?
S1(config)#
ip routing
S1(config)#
int vlan 10
S1(config-if)#
ip address 192.168.10.1 255.255.255.0
S1(config-if)#
int vlan 20
S1(config-if)#
ip address 192.168.20.1 255.255.255.0
A
. 
This is a multilayer switch.
B
. 
The two VLANs are in the same subnet.
C
. 
Encapsulation must be configured.
D
. 
VLAN 10 is the management VLAN.
******************
Answers to Assessment Test
1
. 
B. To allow for the PVST+ to operate, there's a field inserted into the BPDU to accommodate
the extended system ID so that PVST+ can have a root bridge configured on a per-STP
instance. The extended system ID (VLAN ID) is a 12-bit field, and we can even see what this
field is carrying via show spanning-tree command output. See Chapter 15 for more
information.
2
. 
A. Cisco's EtherChannel can bundle up to eight ports between switches to provide resiliency
and more bandwidth between switches. See Chapter 15 for more information.
3
. 
B, C, E. All the ports on both sides of every link must be configured exactly the same between
switches or it will not work. Speed, duplex, and allowed VLANs must match. See Chapter 15
for more information.
4
. 
C. 2100 boots the router into ROM monitor mode, 2101 loads the mini-IOS from ROM, and
2102 is the default and loads the IOS from flash. See Chapter 8 for more information.

5
. 
D. The 
show license udi
 command displays the unique device identifier (UDI) of the router,
which comprises the product ID (PID) and serial number of the router. See Chapter 8 for
more information.
6
. 
B. The 
show license
 feature command allows you to view the technology package licenses and
feature licenses that are supported on your router along with several status variables related
to software activation and licensing, both licensed and unlicensed features. See Chapter 8 for
more information.
7
. 
C, D, F. The SDN architecture slightly differs from the architecture of traditional networks. It
comprises three stacked layers: Data, Control and Application. See Chapter 8 for more
information.
8
. 
B. There are eight different trap levels. If you choose, for example level 3, level 0 through
level 3 messages will be displayed. See Chapter 8 for more information.
9
. 
B, D. Each stack of switches has a single IP address and is managed as a single object. This
single IP management applies to activities such as fault detection, VLAN creation and
modification, security, and QoS controls. Each stack has only one configuration file, which is
distributed to each member in the stack. When you add a new switch to the stack, the master
switch automatically configures the unit with the currently running IOS image and the
configuration of the stack. You do not have to do anything to bring up the switch before it is
ready to operate. See chapter 22 for more information.
10
. 
B. There is no IPv6 default gateway listed in the output, which will be the link-local address of
the router interface, sent to the host as a router advertisement. Until this host receives the
router address, the host will communicate with IPv6 only on the local subnet. See Chapter 20
for more information.
11
. 
D. The command 
show ipv6 neighbors
 provides the ARP cache for on a router. See Chapter 20
for more information.
12
. 
A. If the state is STALE when the interface has not communicated within the neighbor
reachable time frame. The next time the neighbor communicates, the state will be REACH.
See Chapter 20 for more information.
13
. 
C. There are two successor routes, so by default, EIGRP was load-balancing out s0/0 and
s0/1. When s0/1 goes down, EIGRP will just keep forwarding traffic out the second link s0/0.
s0/1 will be removed from the routing table. See Chapter 17 for more information.
14
. 
F. There isn't a lot to go on from with the output, but the only commands that provide the FD
and AD are 
show ip eigrp
 topology and 
show ipv6 eigrp topology
. The addresses in the output
are link-local IPv6 addresses, so our answer is the latter. See Chapter 17 for more
information.
15
. 
A, B, C, D. Cisco has documented steps, according to the objectives, that you must go through
when troubleshooting an adjacency. See Chapter 18 for more information.
16
. 
B, D, E. In order for two OSPF routers to create an adjacency, the Hello and dead timers must
match, and they must both be configured into the same area, as well as being in the same
subnet. See Chapter 18 for more information.
17
. 
A. The process starts by sending out Hello packets. Every listening router will then add the
originating router to the neighbor database. The responding routers will reply with all of their
Hello information so that the originating router can add them to its own neighbor table. At
this point, we will have reached the 2WAY state—only certain routers will advance beyond to
this. See Chapter 19 for more information.
18
. 
C. Referred to as summary link advertisements (SLAs), Type 3 LSAs are generated by area
border routers. These ABRs send Type 3 LSAs toward the area external to the one where they
were generated. See Chapter 19 for more information.
19
. 
B. Authentication Header (AH) provides authentication of either all or part of the IP packet
through the addition of a header that is calculated based on the values in the packet, but it

doesn't offer any encryption services. See Chapter 21 for more information.
20
. 
B. Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) has no built-in security mechanisms. See Chapter 21
for more information.
21
. 
C. When traffic exceeds the allocated rate, the policer can take one of two actions. It can
either drop traffic or re-mark it to another class of service. The new class usually has a higher
drop probability. See Chapter 21 for more information.
22
. 
B. This can be a hard question if you don't remember to invert the 7th bit of the first octet in
the MAC address! Always look for the 7th bit when studying for the Cisco R/S, and when
using eui-64, invert it. The eui-64 autoconfiguration then inserts an FF:FE in the middle of
the 48-bit MAC address to create a unique IPv6 address. See Chapter 14 for more
information.
23
. 
A. The NDP neighbor advertisement (NA) contains the MAC address. A neighbor solicitation
(NS) was initially sent asking for the MAC address. See Chapter 14 for more information.
24
. 
B. Each field in an IPv6 address is 16 bits long. An IPv6 address is a total of 128 bits. See
Chapter 14 for more information.
25
. 
A. To enable OSPFv3, you enable the protocol at the interface level, as with RIPng. The
command string is area-id. It's important to understand that area 
0
 and area 
0.0.0.0
 both
describe area 
0
. See Chapter 19 for more information.
26
. 
C. The command line console 
0
 places you at a prompt where you can then set your console
user-mode password. See Chapter 6 for more information.
27
. 
B, D. The mask 255.255.254.0 (/23) used with a Class A address means that there are 15
subnet bits and 9 host bits. The block size in the third octet is 2 (256–254). So this makes the
subnets in the interesting octet 0, 2, 4, 6, etc., all the way to 254. The host 10.16.3.65 is in the
2.0 subnet. The next subnet is 4.0, so the broadcast address for the 2.0 subnet is 3.255. The
valid host addresses are 2.1 through 3.254. See Chapter 4 for more information.
28
. 
C. The IP address is configured under a logical interface, called a management domain or
VLAN 1, by default. See Chapter 10 for more information.
29
. 
A. 256 – 192 = 64, so 64 is our block size. Just count in increments of 64 to find our subnet:
64 + 64 = 128. 128 + 64 = 192. The subnet is 128, the broadcast address is 191, and the valid
host range is the numbers in between, or 129–190. See Chapter 4 for more information.
30
. 
C. An inside global address is considered to be the IP address of the host on the private
network after translation. See Chapter 13 for more information.
31
. 
B. Once you create your pool, the command ip nat inside source must be used to say which
inside locals are allowed to use the pool. In this question, we need to see if access list 100 is
configured correctly, if at all, so 
show access-list
 is the best answer. See Chapter 13 for more
information.
32
. 
D. Layer 2 switching creates individual collision domains per port. See Chapter 1 for more
information.
33
. 
C. The command line vty 0 4 places you in a prompt that will allow you to set or change your
Telnet password. See Chapter 6 for more information.
34
. 
B. To see the contents of all access lists, use the 
show access-lists
 command. See Chapter 12
for more information.
35
. 
C. VLANs break up broadcast domains at layer 2. See Chapter 11 for more information.
36
. 
A. The command 
erase startup-config
 deletes the configuration stored in NVRAM. See
Chapter 6 for more information.
37
. 
C. ICMP is the protocol at the Network layer that is used to send messages back to an
originating router. See Chapter 3 for more information.
38
. 
A. Class A addressing provides 22 bits for host subnetting. Class B provides 16 bits, but only

14 are available for subnetting. Class C provides only 6 bits for subnetting. See Chapter 3 for
more information.
39
. 
B. Only the EIGRP route will be placed in the routing table because EIGRP has the lowest
administrative distance (AD), and that is always used before metrics. See Chapter 8 for more
information.
40
. 
D. Switches send information about only one VLAN down a link unless it is configured as a
trunk link. See Chapter 11 for more information.
41
. 
B, G. To enable OSPF, you must first start OSPF using a process ID. The number is irrelevant;
just choose a number from 1 to 65,535 and you're good to go. After you start the OSPF
process, you must configure interfaces on which to activate OSPF using the network
command with wildcards and specification of an area. Option F is wrong because there must
be a space after the parameter area and before you list the area number. See Chapter 9 for
more information.
42
. 
A. By default, switches break up collision domains on a per-port basis but are one large
broadcast domain. See Chapter 1 for more information.
43
. 
B. At the moment of OSPF process startup, the highest IP address on any active interface will
be the router ID (RID) of the router. If you have a loopback interface configured (logical
interface), then that will override the interface IP address and become the RID of the router
automatically. See Chapter 18 for more information.
44
. 
C, D. VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP) is not right because it has nothing to do with trunking
except that it sends VLAN information across a trunk link. 802.1q and ISL encapsulations are
used to configure trunking on a port. See Chapter 11 for more information.
45
. 
D. Stub networks have only one connection to an internetwork. Default routes should be set
on a stub network or network loops may occur; however, there are exceptions to this rule.
See Chapter 9 for more information.
46
. 
B. Hubs regenerate electrical signals, which are specified at the Physical layer. See Chapter 1
for more information.
47
. 
A, C. Standard and extended access control lists (ACLs) are used to configure security on a
router. See Chapter 12 for more information.
48
. 
C. If you start at 192.168.128.0 and go through 192.168.159.0, you can see that this is a block
of 32 in the third octet. Since the network address is always the first one in the range, the
summary address is 192.168.128.0. What mask provides a block of 32 in the third octet? The
answer is 255.255.224.0, or /19. See Chapter 5 for more information.
49
. 
B. The command to back up the configuration on a router is 
copy running-config startup-config
.
See Chapter 7 for more information.
50
. 
C. IEEE 802.3ab is the standard for 1 Gbps on twisted-pair. See Chapter 2 for more
information.
51
. 
C. User Datagram Protocol is a connection network service at the Transport layer, and DHCP
uses this connectionless service. See Chapter 3 for more information
52
. 
E. The clock rate command is two words, and the speed of the line is in bits per second (bps).
See Chapter 6 for more information.
53
. 
C. The 
show ip interface
 command will 
show
 you if any interfaces have an outbound or inbound
access list set. See Chapter 12 for more information.
54
. 
C. Unlike ISL, which encapsulates the frame with control information, 802.1q inserts an
802.1q field along with tag control information. See Chapter 11 for more information.
55
. 
C. The PDU encapsulation method defines how data is encoded as it goes through each layer
of the TCP/IP model. Data is segmented at the Transport later, packets created at the
Network layer, frames at the Data Link layer, and finally, the Physical layer encodes the 1s

and 0s into a digital signal. See Chapter 2 for more information.
56
. 
A. With a multilayer switch, enable IP routing and create one logical interface for each VLAN
using the interface vlan number command and you're now doing inter-VLAN routing on the
backplane of the switch! See Chapter 11 for more information.

Assessment Test
1
. 
What is the 
sys-id-ext
 field in a BPDU used for?
A
. 
It is a 4-bit field inserted into an Ethernet frame to define trunking information between
switches.
B
. 
It is a 12-bit field inserted into an Ethernet frame to define VLANs in an STP instance.
C
. 
It is a 4-bit field inserted into an non-Ethernet frame to define EtherChannel options.
D
. 
It is a 12-bit field inserted into an Ethernet frame to define STP root bridges.
2
. 
You have four RSTP PVST+ links between switches and want to aggregate the bandwidth.
What solution will you use?
A
. 
EtherChannel
B
. 
PortFast
C
. 
BPDU Channel
D
. 
VLANs
E
. 
EtherBundle
3
. 
What configuration parameters must be configured the same between switches for LACP to
form a channel? (Choose three.)
A
. 
Virtual MAC address
B
. 
Port speeds
C
. 
Duplex
D
. 
PortFast enabled
E
. 
Allowed VLAN information
4
. 
You reload a router with a configuration register setting of 0x2101. What will the router do
when it reloads?
A
. 
The router enters setup mode.
B
. 
The router enters ROM monitor mode.
C
. 
The router boots the mini-IOS in ROM.
D
. 
The router expands the first IOS in flash memory into RAM.
5
. 
Which of the following commands provides the product ID and serial number of a router?
A
. 
show license
B
. 
show license feature
C
. 
show version
D
. 
show license udi
6
. 
Which command allows you to view the technology options and licenses that are supported
on your router along with several status variables?
A
. 
show license
B
. 
show license feature
C
. 
show license udi
D
. 
show version
7
. 
Which of the following services provide the operating system and the network?

A
. 
IaaS
B
. 
PaaS
C
. 
SaaS
D
. 
none of the above
8
. 
You want to send a console message to a syslog server, but you only want to send status
messages of 3 and lower. Which of the following commands will you use?
A
. 
logging trap emergencies
B
. 
logging trap errors
C
. 
logging trap debugging
D
. 
logging trap notifications
E
. 
logging trap critical
F
. 
logging trap warnings
G
. 
logging trap alerts
9
. 
When stacking switches, which is true? (Choose 2)
A
. 
The stack is managed as multiple objects, and has a single management IP address
B
. 
The stack is managed as a single object, and has a single management IP address
C
. 
The master switch is chosen when you configure the first switches master algorithm to on
D
. 
The master switch is elected form one of the stack member switches
10
. 
You need to connect to a remote IPv6 server in your virtual server farm. You can connect to
the IPv4 servers, but not the critical IPv6 server you desperately need. Based on the
following output, what could your problem be?
C:\>
ipconfig
Connection-specific DNS Suffix . : localdomain
IPv6 Address. . . . . . . . . . . : 2001:db8:3c4d:3:ac3b:2ef:1823:8938
Temporary IPv6 Address. . . . . . : 2001:db8:3c4d:3:2f33:44dd:211:1c3d
Link-local IPv6 Address . . . . . : fe80::ac3b:2ef:1823:8938%11
IPv4 Address. . . . . . . . . . . : 10.1.1.10
Subnet Mask . . . . . . . . . . . : 255.255.255.0
Default Gateway
 . . . . . . . . . : 10.1.1.1
A
. 
The global address is in the wrong subnet.
B
. 
The IPv6 default gateway has not been configured or received from the router.
C
. 
The link-local address has not been resolved so the host cannot communicate to the
router.
D
. 
There are two IPv6 global addresses configured. One must be removed from the
configuration.
11
. 
What command is used to view the IPv6-to-MAC-address resolution table on a Cisco router?
A
. 
show ip arp
B
. 
show ipv6 arp
C
. 
show ip neighbors
D
. 
show ipv6 neighbors
E
. 
show arp
12
. 
An IPv6 ARP entry is listed as with a status of REACH. What can you conclude about the
IPv6-to-MAC-address mapping?
A
. 
The interface has communicated with the neighbor address and the mapping is current.
B
. 
The interface has not communicated within the neighbor reachable time frame.

C
. 
The ARP entry has timed out.
D
. 
IPv6 can reach the neighbor address but the addresses has not yet been resolved.
13
. 
Serial0/1 goes down. How will EIGRP send packets to the 10.1.1.0 network?
Corp#show ip eigrp topology
[output cut]
P 10.1.1.0/24, 2 successors, FD is 2681842
 via 10.1.2.2 (2681842/2169856), Serial0/0
 via 10.1.3.1 (2973467/2579243), Serial0/2
 via 10.1.3.3 (2681842/2169856), Serial0/1
A
. 
EIGRP will put the 10.1.1.0 network into active mode.
B
. 
EIGRP will drop all packets destined for 10.1.1.0.
C
. 
EIGRP will just keep sending packets out s0/0.
D
. 
EIGRP will use s0/2 as the successor and keep routing to 10.1.1.0.
14
. 
What command produced the following output?
via FE80::201:C9FF:FED0:3301 (29110112/33316), Serial0/0/0
via FE80::209:7CFF:FE51:B401 (4470112/42216), Serial0/0/1
via FE80::209:7CFF:FE51:B401 (2170112/2816), Serial0/0/2
A
. 
show ip protocols
B
. 
show ipv6 protocols
C
. 
show ip eigrp neighbors
D
. 
show ipv6 eigrp neighbors
E
. 
show ip eigrp topology
F
. 
show ipv6 eigrp topology
15
. 
You need to troubleshoot an adjacency between two EIGRP configured routers? What should
you look for? (Choose four.)
A
. 
Verify the AS numbers.
B
. 
Verify that you have the proper interfaces enabled for EIGRP.
C
. 
Make sure there are no mismatched K-values.
D
. 
Check your passive interface settings.
E
. 
Make sure your remote routers are not connected to the Internet.
F
. 
If authentication is configured, make sure all routers use different passwords.
16
. 
You have two OSPF directly configured routers that are not forming an adjacency. What
should you check? (Choose three.)
A
. 
Process ID
B
. 
Hello and dead timers
C
. 
Link cost
D
. 
Area
E
. 
IP address/subnet mask
17
. 
When do two adjacent routers-enter the 2WAY state?
A
. 
After both routers have received Hello information
B
. 
After they have exchanged topology databases
C
. 
When they connect only to a DR or BDR
D
. 
When they need to exchange RID information

18
. 
Which type of LSAs are generated by ABRs and referred to summary link advertisements
(SLAs)?
A
. 
Type 1
B
. 
Type 2
C
. 
Type 3
D
. 
Type 4
E
. 
Type 5
19
. 
Which of the following is not provided by the AH portion of IPsec?
A
. 
Integrity
B
. 
Confidentiality
C
. 
Authenticity
D
. 
Anti-reply
20
. 
Which statement about GRE is not true?
A
. 
GRE is stateless and has no flow control.
B
. 
GRE has security.
C
. 
GRE has additional overhead for tunneled packets, at least 24 bytes.
D
. 
GRE uses a protocol-type field in the GRE header so any layer 3 protocol can be used
through the tunnel.
21
. 
Which QoS mechanism will drop traffic if a session uses more than the allotted bandwidth?
A
. 
Congestion management
B
. 
Shaping
C
. 
Policing
D
. 
Marking
22
. 
IPv6 unicast routing is running on the Corp router. Which of the following addresses would
show up with the show ipv6 int brief command?
Corp#
sh int f0/0
FastEthernet0/0 is up, line protocol is up
 Hardware is AmdFE, address is 000d.bd3b.0d80 (bia 000d.bd3b.0d80)
[output cut]
A
. 
FF02::3c3d:0d:bdff:fe3b:0d80
B
. 
FE80::3c3d:2d:bdff:fe3b:0d80
C
. 
FE80::3c3d:0d:bdff:fe3b:0d80
D
. 
FE80::3c3d:2d:ffbd:3bfe:0d80
23
. 
A host sends a type of NDP message providing the MAC address that was requested. Which
type of NDP was sent?
A
. 
NA
B
. 
RS
C
. 
RA
D
. 
NS
24
. 
Each field in an IPv6 address is how many bits long?
A
. 
4
B
. 
16

C
. 
32
D
. 
128
25
. 
To enable OSPFv3, which of the following would you use?
A
. 
Router(config-if)#
ipv6 ospf 10 area 0.0.0.0
B
. 
Router(config-if)#
ipv6 router rip 1
C
. 
Router(config)#
ipv6 router eigrp 10
D
. 
Router(config-rtr)#
no shutdown
E
. 
Router(config-if)#
ospf ipv6 10 area 0
26
. 
What does the command 
routerA(config)#
line cons 0
 allow you to perform next?
A
. 
Set the Telnet password.
B
. 
Shut down the router.
C
. 
Set your console password.
D
. 
Disable console connections.
27
. 
Which two statements describe the IP address 10.16.3.65/23? (Choose two.)
A
. 
The subnet address is 10.16.3.0 255.255.254.0.
B
. 
The lowest host address in the subnet is 10.16.2.1 255.255.254.0.
C
. 
The last valid host address in the subnet is 10.16.2.254 255.255.254.0.
D
. 
The broadcast address of the subnet is 10.16.3.255 255.255.254.0.
E
. 
The network is not subnetted.
28
. 
On which interface do you configure an IP address for a switch?
A
. 
int fa0/0
B
. 
int vty 0 15
C
. 
int vlan 1
D
. 
int s/0/0
29
. 
Which of the following is the valid host range for the subnet on which the IP address
192.168.168.188 255.255.255.192 resides?
A
. 
192.168.168.129–190
B
. 
192.168.168.129–191
C
. 
192.168.168.128–190
D
. 
192.168.168.128–192
30
. 
Which of the following is considered to be the inside host's address after translation?
A
. 
Inside local
B
. 
Outside local
C
. 
Inside global
D
. 
Outside global
31
. 
Your inside locals are not being translated to the inside global addresses. Which of the
following commands will show you if your inside globals are allowed to use the NAT pool?
ip nat pool Corp 198.18.41.129 198.18.41.134 netmask 255.255.255.248
ip nat inside source list 100 int pool Corp overload
A
. 
debug ip nat

B
. 
show access-list
C
. 
show ip nat translation
D
. 
show ip nat statistics
32
. 
How many collision domains are created when you segment a network with a 12-port switch?
A
. 
1
B
. 
2
C
. 
5
D
. 
12
33
. 
Which of the following commands will allow you to set your Telnet password on a Cisco
router?
A
. 
line telnet 0 4
B
. 
line aux 0 4
C
. 
line vty 0 4
D
. 
line con 0
34
. 
Which router command allows you to view the entire contents of all access lists?
A
. 
show all access-lists
B
. 
show access-lists
C
. 
show ip interface
D
. 
show interface
35
. 
What does a VLAN do?
A
. 
Acts as the fastest port to all servers
B
. 
Provides multiple collision domains on one switch port
C
. 
Breaks up broadcast domains in a layer 2 switch internetwork
D
. 
Provides multiple broadcast domains within a single collision domain
36
. 
If you wanted to delete the configuration stored in NVRAM, choose the best answer for the
Cisco objectives.
A
. 
erase startup
B
. 
delete running
C
. 
erase flash
D
. 
erase running
37
. 
Which protocol is used to send a destination network unknown message back to originating
hosts?
A
. 
TCP
B
. 
ARP
C
. 
ICMP
D
. 
BootP
38
. 
Which class of IP address provides 15 bits for subnetting?
A
. 
A
B
. 
B
C
. 
C

D
. 
D
39
. 
There are three possible routes for a router to reach a destination network. The first route is
from OSPF with a metric of 782. The second route is from RIPv2 with a metric of 4. The third
is from EIGRP with a composite metric of 20514560. Which route will be installed by the
router in its routing table?
A
. 
RIPv2
B
. 
EIGRP
C
. 
OSPF
D
. 
All three
40
. 
Which one of the following is true regarding VLANs?
A
. 
Two VLANs are configured by default on all Cisco switches.
B
. 
VLANs only work if you have a complete Cisco switched internetwork. No off-brand
switches are allowed.
C
. 
You should not have more than 10 switches in the same VTP domain.
D
. 
You need to have a trunk link configured between switches in order to send information
about more than one VLAN down the link.
41
. 
Which two of the following commands will place network 10.2.3.0/24 into area 0? (Choose
two.)
A
. 
router eigrp 10
B
. 
router ospf 10
C
. 
router rip
D
. 
network 10.0.0.0
E
. 
network 10.2.3.0 255.255.255.0 area 0
F
. 
network 10.2.3.0 0.0.0.255 area0
G
. 
network 10.2.3.0 0.0.0.255 area 0
42
. 
How many broadcast domains are created when you segment a network with a 12-port
switch?
A
. 
1
B
. 
2
C
. 
5
D
. 
12
43
. 
If routers in a single area are configured with the same priority value, what value does a
router use for the OSPF router ID in the absence of a loopback interface?
A
. 
The lowest IP address of any physical interface
B
. 
The highest IP address of any physical interface
C
. 
The lowest IP address of any logical interface
D
. 
The highest IP address of any logical interface
44
. 
What protocols are used to configure trunking on a switch? (Choose two.)
A
. 
VLAN Trunking Protocol
B
. 
VLAN
C
. 
802.1q
D
. 
ISL

45
. 
What is a stub network?
A
. 
A network with more than one exit point
B
. 
A network with more than one exit and entry point
C
. 
A network with only one entry and no exit point
D
. 
A network that has only one entry and exit point
46
. 
Where is a hub specified in the OSI model?
A
. 
Session layer
B
. 
Physical layer
C
. 
Data Link layer
D
. 
Application layer
47
. 
What are the two main types of access control lists (ACLs)? (Choose two.)
A
. 
Standard
B
. 
IEEE
C
. 
Extended
D
. 
Specialized
48
. 
Which of the following is the best summarization of the following networks: 192.168.128.0
through 192.168.159.0?
A
. 
192.168.0.0/24
B
. 
192.168.128.0/16
C
. 
192.168.128.0/19
D
. 
192.168.128.0/20
49
. 
What command is used to create a backup configuration?
A
. 
copy running backup
B
. 
copy running-config startup-config
C
. 
config mem
D
. 
wr net
50
. 
1000Base-T is which IEEE standard?
A
. 
802.3f
B
. 
802.3z
C
. 
802.3ab
D
. 
802.3ae
51
. 
Which protocol does DHCP use at the Transport layer?
A
. 
IP
B
. 
TCP
C
. 
UDP
D
. 
ARP
52
. 
If your router is facilitating a CSU/DSU, which of the following commands do you need to use
to provide the router with a 64000 bps serial link?
A
. 
RouterA(config)#bandwidth 64
B
. 
RouterA(config-if)#bandwidth 64000

C
. 
RouterA(config)#clockrate 64000
D
. 
RouterA(config-if)#clock rate 64
E
. 
RouterA(config-if)#clock rate 64000
53
. 
Which command is used to determine if an access list is enabled on a particular interface?
A
. 
show access-lists
B
. 
show interface
C
. 
show ip interface
D
. 
show interface access-lists
54
. 
Which of the following statements is true with regard to ISL and 802.1q?
A
. 
802.1q encapsulates the frame with control information; ISL inserts an ISL field along
with tag control information.
B
. 
802.1q is Cisco proprietary.
C
. 
ISL encapsulates the frame with control information; 802.1q inserts an 802.1q field along
with tag control information.
D
. 
ISL is a standard.
55
. 
The protocol data unit (PDU) encapsulation is completed in which order?
A
. 
Bits, frames, packets, segments, data
B
. 
Data, bits, segments, frames, packets
C
. 
Data, segments, packets, frames, bits
D
. 
Packets, frames, bits, segments, data
56
. 
Based on the configuration shown below, what statement is true?
S1(config)#
ip routing
S1(config)#
int vlan 10
S1(config-if)#
ip address 192.168.10.1 255.255.255.0
S1(config-if)#
int vlan 20
S1(config-if)#
ip address 192.168.20.1 255.255.255.0
A
. 
This is a multilayer switch.
B
. 
The two VLANs are in the same subnet.
C
. 
Encapsulation must be configured.
D
. 
VLAN 10 is the management VLAN.

Answers to Assessment Test
1
. 
B. To allow for the PVST+ to operate, there's a field inserted into the BPDU to accommodate
the extended system ID so that PVST+ can have a root bridge configured on a per-STP
instance. The extended system ID (VLAN ID) is a 12-bit field, and we can even see what this
field is carrying via show spanning-tree command output. See Chapter 15 for more
information.
2
. 
A. Cisco's EtherChannel can bundle up to eight ports between switches to provide resiliency
and more bandwidth between switches. See Chapter 15 for more information.
3
. 
B, C, E. All the ports on both sides of every link must be configured exactly the same between
switches or it will not work. Speed, duplex, and allowed VLANs must match. See Chapter 15
for more information.
4
. 
C. 2100 boots the router into ROM monitor mode, 2101 loads the mini-IOS from ROM, and
2102 is the default and loads the IOS from flash. See Chapter 8 for more information.
5
. 
D. The 
show license udi
 command displays the unique device identifier (UDI) of the router,
which comprises the product ID (PID) and serial number of the router. See Chapter 8 for
more information.
6
. 
B. The 
show license
 feature command allows you to view the technology package licenses and
feature licenses that are supported on your router along with several status variables related
to software activation and licensing, both licensed and unlicensed features. See Chapter 8 for
more information.
7
. 
C, D, F. The SDN architecture slightly differs from the architecture of traditional networks. It
comprises three stacked layers: Data, Control and Application. See Chapter 8 for more
information.
8
. 
B. There are eight different trap levels. If you choose, for example level 3, level 0 through
level 3 messages will be displayed. See Chapter 8 for more information.
9
. 
B, D. Each stack of switches has a single IP address and is managed as a single object. This
single IP management applies to activities such as fault detection, VLAN creation and
modification, security, and QoS controls. Each stack has only one configuration file, which is
distributed to each member in the stack. When you add a new switch to the stack, the master
switch automatically configures the unit with the currently running IOS image and the
configuration of the stack. You do not have to do anything to bring up the switch before it is
ready to operate. See chapter 22 for more information.
10
. 
B. There is no IPv6 default gateway listed in the output, which will be the link-local address of
the router interface, sent to the host as a router advertisement. Until this host receives the
router address, the host will communicate with IPv6 only on the local subnet. See Chapter 20
for more information.
11
. 
D. The command 
show ipv6 neighbors
 provides the ARP cache for on a router. See Chapter 20
for more information.
12
. 
A. If the state is STALE when the interface has not communicated within the neighbor
reachable time frame. The next time the neighbor communicates, the state will be REACH.
See Chapter 20 for more information.
13
. 
C. There are two successor routes, so by default, EIGRP was load-balancing out s0/0 and
s0/1. When s0/1 goes down, EIGRP will just keep forwarding traffic out the second link s0/0.
s0/1 will be removed from the routing table. See Chapter 17 for more information.
14
. 
F. There isn't a lot to go on from with the output, but the only commands that provide the FD
and AD are 
show ip eigrp
 topology and 
show ipv6 eigrp topology
. The addresses in the output
are link-local IPv6 addresses, so our answer is the latter. See Chapter 17 for more

information.
15
. 
A, B, C, D. Cisco has documented steps, according to the objectives, that you must go through
when troubleshooting an adjacency. See Chapter 18 for more information.
16
. 
B, D, E. In order for two OSPF routers to create an adjacency, the Hello and dead timers must
match, and they must both be configured into the same area, as well as being in the same
subnet. See Chapter 18 for more information.
17
. 
A. The process starts by sending out Hello packets. Every listening router will then add the
originating router to the neighbor database. The responding routers will reply with all of their
Hello information so that the originating router can add them to its own neighbor table. At
this point, we will have reached the 2WAY state—only certain routers will advance beyond to
this. See Chapter 19 for more information.
18
. 
C. Referred to as summary link advertisements (SLAs), Type 3 LSAs are generated by area
border routers. These ABRs send Type 3 LSAs toward the area external to the one where they
were generated. See Chapter 19 for more information.
19
. 
B. Authentication Header (AH) provides authentication of either all or part of the IP packet
through the addition of a header that is calculated based on the values in the packet, but it
doesn't offer any encryption services. See Chapter 21 for more information.
20
. 
B. Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) has no built-in security mechanisms. See Chapter 21
for more information.
21
. 
C. When traffic exceeds the allocated rate, the policer can take one of two actions. It can
either drop traffic or re-mark it to another class of service. The new class usually has a higher
drop probability. See Chapter 21 for more information.
22
. 
B. This can be a hard question if you don't remember to invert the 7th bit of the first octet in
the MAC address! Always look for the 7th bit when studying for the Cisco R/S, and when
using eui-64, invert it. The eui-64 autoconfiguration then inserts an FF:FE in the middle of
the 48-bit MAC address to create a unique IPv6 address. See Chapter 14 for more
information.
23
. 
A. The NDP neighbor advertisement (NA) contains the MAC address. A neighbor solicitation
(NS) was initially sent asking for the MAC address. See Chapter 14 for more information.
24
. 
B. Each field in an IPv6 address is 16 bits long. An IPv6 address is a total of 128 bits. See
Chapter 14 for more information.
25
. 
A. To enable OSPFv3, you enable the protocol at the interface level, as with RIPng. The
command string is area-id. It's important to understand that area 
0
 and area 
0.0.0.0
 both
describe area 
0
. See Chapter 19 for more information.
26
. 
C. The command line console 
0
 places you at a prompt where you can then set your console
user-mode password. See Chapter 6 for more information.
27
. 
B, D. The mask 255.255.254.0 (/23) used with a Class A address means that there are 15
subnet bits and 9 host bits. The block size in the third octet is 2 (256–254). So this makes the
subnets in the interesting octet 0, 2, 4, 6, etc., all the way to 254. The host 10.16.3.65 is in the
2.0 subnet. The next subnet is 4.0, so the broadcast address for the 2.0 subnet is 3.255. The
valid host addresses are 2.1 through 3.254. See Chapter 4 for more information.
28
. 
C. The IP address is configured under a logical interface, called a management domain or
VLAN 1, by default. See Chapter 10 for more information.
29
. 
A. 256 – 192 = 64, so 64 is our block size. Just count in increments of 64 to find our subnet:
64 + 64 = 128. 128 + 64 = 192. The subnet is 128, the broadcast address is 191, and the valid
host range is the numbers in between, or 129–190. See Chapter 4 for more information.
30
. 
C. An inside global address is considered to be the IP address of the host on the private
network after translation. See Chapter 13 for more information.

31
. 
B. Once you create your pool, the command ip nat inside source must be used to say which
inside locals are allowed to use the pool. In this question, we need to see if access list 100 is
configured correctly, if at all, so 
show access-list
 is the best answer. See Chapter 13 for more
information.
32
. 
D. Layer 2 switching creates individual collision domains per port. See Chapter 1 for more
information.
33
. 
C. The command line vty 0 4 places you in a prompt that will allow you to set or change your
Telnet password. See Chapter 6 for more information.
34
. 
B. To see the contents of all access lists, use the 
show access-lists
 command. See Chapter 12
for more information.
35
. 
C. VLANs break up broadcast domains at layer 2. See Chapter 11 for more information.
36
. 
A. The command 
erase startup-config
 deletes the configuration stored in NVRAM. See
Chapter 6 for more information.
37
. 
C. ICMP is the protocol at the Network layer that is used to send messages back to an
originating router. See Chapter 3 for more information.
38
. 
A. Class A addressing provides 22 bits for host subnetting. Class B provides 16 bits, but only
14 are available for subnetting. Class C provides only 6 bits for subnetting. See Chapter 3 for
more information.
39
. 
B. Only the EIGRP route will be placed in the routing table because EIGRP has the lowest
administrative distance (AD), and that is always used before metrics. See Chapter 8 for more
information.
40
. 
D. Switches send information about only one VLAN down a link unless it is configured as a
trunk link. See Chapter 11 for more information.
41
. 
B, G. To enable OSPF, you must first start OSPF using a process ID. The number is irrelevant;
just choose a number from 1 to 65,535 and you're good to go. After you start the OSPF
process, you must configure interfaces on which to activate OSPF using the network
command with wildcards and specification of an area. Option F is wrong because there must
be a space after the parameter area and before you list the area number. See Chapter 9 for
more information.
42
. 
A. By default, switches break up collision domains on a per-port basis but are one large
broadcast domain. See Chapter 1 for more information.
43
. 
B. At the moment of OSPF process startup, the highest IP address on any active interface will
be the router ID (RID) of the router. If you have a loopback interface configured (logical
interface), then that will override the interface IP address and become the RID of the router
automatically. See Chapter 18 for more information.
44
. 
C, D. VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP) is not right because it has nothing to do with trunking
except that it sends VLAN information across a trunk link. 802.1q and ISL encapsulations are
used to configure trunking on a port. See Chapter 11 for more information.
45
. 
D. Stub networks have only one connection to an internetwork. Default routes should be set
on a stub network or network loops may occur; however, there are exceptions to this rule.
See Chapter 9 for more information.
46
. 
B. Hubs regenerate electrical signals, which are specified at the Physical layer. See Chapter 1
for more information.
47
. 
A, C. Standard and extended access control lists (ACLs) are used to configure security on a
router. See Chapter 12 for more information.
48
. 
C. If you start at 192.168.128.0 and go through 192.168.159.0, you can see that this is a block
of 32 in the third octet. Since the network address is always the first one in the range, the
summary address is 192.168.128.0. What mask provides a block of 32 in the third octet? The

answer is 255.255.224.0, or /19. See Chapter 5 for more information.
49
. 
B. The command to back up the configuration on a router is 
copy running-config startup-config
.
See Chapter 7 for more information.
50
. 
C. IEEE 802.3ab is the standard for 1 Gbps on twisted-pair. See Chapter 2 for more
information.
51
. 
C. User Datagram Protocol is a connection network service at the Transport layer, and DHCP
uses this connectionless service. See Chapter 3 for more information
52
. 
E. The clock rate command is two words, and the speed of the line is in bits per second (bps).
See Chapter 6 for more information.
53
. 
C. The 
show ip interface
 command will 
show
 you if any interfaces have an outbound or inbound
access list set. See Chapter 12 for more information.
54
. 
C. Unlike ISL, which encapsulates the frame with control information, 802.1q inserts an
802.1q field along with tag control information. See Chapter 11 for more information.
55
. 
C. The PDU encapsulation method defines how data is encoded as it goes through each layer
of the TCP/IP model. Data is segmented at the Transport later, packets created at the
Network layer, frames at the Data Link layer, and finally, the Physical layer encodes the 1s
and 0s into a digital signal. See Chapter 2 for more information.
56
. 
A. With a multilayer switch, enable IP routing and create one logical interface for each VLAN
using the interface vlan number command and you're now doing inter-VLAN routing on the
backplane of the switch! See Chapter 11 for more information.

Part 1
ICND1

Chapter 1
Internetworking 
THE FOLLOWING ICND1 EXAM TOPICS ARE COVERED IN
THIS CHAPTER:
 
Network Fundamentals
 1.3 Describe the impact of infrastructure components in an enterprise network
 1.3.a Firewalls
 1.3.b Access points
 1.3.c Wireless controllers
 1.5 Compare and contrast network topologies
 1.5.a Star
 1.5.b Mesh
 1.5.c Hybrid
 Welcome to the exciting world of internetworking. This
first chapter will serve as an internetworking review by focusing on how to connect networks
together using Cisco routers and switches, and I’ve written it with the assumption that you have
some simple basic networking knowledge. The emphasis of this review will be on the Cisco
CCENT and/or CCNA Routing and Switching (CCNA R/S) objectives, on which you’ll need a
solid grasp in order to succeed in getting your certifications.
Let’s start by defining exactly what an internetwork is: You create an internetwork when you
connect two or more networks via a router and configure a logical network addressing scheme
with a protocol such as IP or IPv6.
We’ll also dissect the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model, and I’ll describe each part of it
to you in detail because you really need complete, reliable knowledge of it. Understanding the
OSI model is key for the solid foundation you’ll need to build upon with the more advanced Cisco
networking knowledge gained as you become increasingly more skilled.
The OSI model has seven hierarchical layers that were developed to enable different networks to
communicate reliably between disparate systems. Since this book is centering upon all things
CCNA, it’s crucial for you to understand the OSI model as Cisco sees it, so that’s how I’ll be
presenting the seven layers to you.
After you finish reading this chapter, you’ll encounter review questions and written labs. These

are given to you to really lock the information from this chapter into your memory. So don’t skip
them!
 To find up-to-the-minute updates for this chapter, please see
www.lammle.com/ccna
 or the book’s web page via 
www.sybex.com/go/ccna
.
Internetworking Basics
Before exploring internetworking models and the OSI model’s specifications, you need to grasp
the big picture and the answer to this burning question: Why is it so important to learn Cisco
internetworking anyway?
Networks and networking have grown exponentially over the past 20 years, and understandably
so. They’ve had to evolve at light speed just to keep up with huge increases in basic, mission-
critical user needs (e.g., the simple sharing of data and printers) as well as greater burdens like
multimedia remote presentations and conferencing. Unless everyone 
who needs to share
network resources is located in the same office space—an increasingly uncommon situation—the
challenge is to connect relevant networks so all users can share the wealth of whatever services
and resources are required.
Figure 1.1
 shows a basic 
local area network (LAN)
 that’s connected using a 
hub
, which is basically
just an antiquated device that connects wires together. Keep in mind that a simple network like
this would be considered one collision domain and one broadcast domain. No worries if you have
no idea what I mean by that because coming up soon, I’m going to talk about collision and
broadcast domains enough to make you dream about them!
FIGURE 1.1
 A very basic network
Things really can’t get much simpler than this. And yes, though you can still find this
configuration in some home networks, even many of those as well as the smallest business
networks are more complicated today. As we move through this book, I’ll just keep building upon

this tiny network a bit at a time until we arrive at some really nice, robust, and current network
designs—the types that will help you get your certification and a job!
But as I said, we’ll get there one step at a time, so let’s get back to the network shown in 
Figure 1.1
with this scenario: Bob wants to send Sally a file, and to complete that goal in this kind of
network, he’ll simply broadcast that he’s looking for her, which is basically just shouting out over
the network. Think of it like this: Bob walks out of his house and yells down a street called Chaos
Court in order to contact Sally. This might work if Bob and Sally were the only ones living there,
but not so much if it’s crammed with homes and all the others living there are always hollering up
and down the street to their neighbors just like Bob. Nope, Chaos Court would absolutely live up
to its name, with all those residents going off whenever they felt like it—and believe it or not, our
networks actually still work this way to a degree! So, given a choice, would you stay in Chaos
Court, or would you pull up stakes and move on over to a nice new modern community called
Broadway Lanes, which offers plenty of amenities and room for your home plus future additions
all on nice, wide streets that can easily handle all present and future traffic? If you chose the
latter, good choice… so did Sally, and she now lives a much quieter life, getting letters (packets)
from Bob instead of a headache!
The scenario I just described brings me to the basic point of what this book and the Cisco
certification objectives are really all about. My goal of showing you how to create efficient
networks and segment them correctly in order to minimize all the chaotic yelling and screaming
going on in them is a universal theme throughout my CCENT and CCNA series books. It’s just
inevitable that you’ll have to break up a large network into a bunch of smaller 
ones at some point
to match a network’s equally inevitable growth, and as that expansion occurs, user response time
simultaneously dwindles to a frustrating crawl. But if you master the vital technology and skills I
have in store for you in this series, you’ll be well equipped to rescue your network and its users
by creating an efficient new network neighborhood to give them key amenities like the
bandwidth they need to meet their evolving demands.
And this is no joke; most of us think of growth as good—and it can be—but as many of us
experience daily when commuting to work, school, etc., it can also mean your LAN’s traffic
congestion can reach critical mass and grind to a complete halt! Again, the solution to this
problem begins with breaking up a massive network into a number of smaller ones—something
called 
network segmentation
. This concept is a lot like planning a new community or
modernizing an existing one. More streets are added, complete with new intersections and traffic
signals, plus post offices are built with official maps documenting all those street names and
directions on how to get to each. You’ll need to effect new laws to keep order to it all and provide
a police station to protect this nice new neighborhood as well. In a networking neighborhood
environment, all of this is carried out using devices like 
routers, switches
, and 
bridges
.
So let’s take a look at our new neighborhood now, because the word has gotten out; many more
hosts have moved into it, so it’s time to upgrade that new high-capacity infrastructure that we
promised to handle the increase in population. 
Figure 1.2
 shows a network that’s been segmented
with a switch, making each network segment that connects to the switch its own separate collision
domain. Doing this results in a lot less yelling!

FIGURE 1.2
 A switch can break up collision domains.
This is a great start, but I really want you to make note of the fact that this network is still one,
single broadcast domain, meaning that we’ve really only decreased our screaming and yelling,
not eliminated it. For example, if there’s some sort of vital announcement that everyone in our
neighborhood needs to hear about, it will definitely still get loud! You can see that the hub used in
Figure 1.2
 just extended the one collision domain from the switch port. The result is that John
received the data from Bob but, happily, Sally did not. This is good because Bob intended to talk
with John directly, and if he had needed to send a broadcast instead, everyone, including Sally,
would have received it, possibly causing unnecessary congestion.
Here’s a list of some of the things that commonly cause LAN traffic congestion:
Too many hosts in a collision or broadcast domain
Broadcast storms
 Too much multicast traffic
Low bandwidth
Adding hubs for connectivity to the network
A bunch of ARP broadcasts
Take another look at 
Figure 1.2
 and make sure you see that I extended the main hub from 
Figure
1.1
 to a switch in 
Figure 1.2
. I did that because hubs don’t segment a network; they just connect
network segments. Basically, it’s an inexpensive way to connect a couple of PCs, and again, that’s
great for home use and troubleshooting, but that’s about it!
As our planned community starts to grow, we’ll need to add more streets with traffic control, and
even some basic security. We’ll achieve this by adding routers because these convenient devices
are used to connect networks and route packets of data from one network to another. Cisco
became the de facto standard for routers because of its unparalleled selection of high-quality
router products and fantastic service. So never forget that by default, routers are basically
employed to efficiently break up a 
broadcast domain
—the set of all devices on a network
segment, which are allowed to “hear” all broadcasts sent out on that specific segment.
Figure 1.3
 depicts a router in our growing network, creating an internetwork and breaking up
broadcast domains.

FIGURE 1.3
 Routers create an internetwork.
The network in 
Figure 1.3
 is actually a pretty cool little network. Each host is connected to its
own collision domain because of the switch, and the router has created two broadcast domains.
So now our Sally is happily living in peace in a completely different neighborhood, no longer
subjected to Bob’s incessant shouting! If Bob wants to talk with Sally, he has to send a packet with
a destination address using her IP address—he cannot broadcast for her!
But there’s more… routers provide connections to 
wide area network (WAN)
 services as well via
a serial interface for WAN connections—specifically, a V.35 physical interface on a Cisco router.
Let me make sure you understand why breaking up a broadcast domain is so important. When a
host or server sends a network broadcast, every device on the network must read and process
that broadcast—unless you have a router. When the router’s interface receives this broadcast, it
can respond by basically saying, “Thanks, but no thanks,” and discard the broadcast without
forwarding it on to other networks. Even though routers are known for breaking up broadcast
domains by default, it’s important to remember that they break up collision domains as well.
There are two advantages to using routers in your network:
They don’t forward broadcasts by default.
They can filter the network based on layer 3 (Network layer) information such as an IP
address.
Here are four ways a router functions in your network:
Packet switching
Packet filtering
Internetwork communication
Path selection
I’ll tell you all about the various layers later in this chapter, but for now, it’s helpful to think of
routers as layer 3 switches. Unlike plain-vanilla layer 2 switches, which forward or filter frames,
routers (layer 3 switches) use logical addressing and provide an important capacity called 
packet
switching
. Routers can also provide packet filtering via access lists, and when routers connect
two or more networks together and use logical addressing (IP or IPv6), you then have an
internetwork
. Finally, routers use a routing table, which is essentially a map of the internetwork,
to make best path selections for getting data to its proper destination and properly forward
packets to remote networks.
Conversely, we don’t use layer 2 switches to create internetworks because they don’t break up
broadcast domains by default. Instead, they’re employed to add functionality to a network LAN.
The main purpose of these switches is to make a LAN work better—to optimize its performance—
providing more bandwidth for the LAN’s users. Also, these switches don’t forward packets to
other networks like routers do. Instead, they only “switch” frames from one port to another
within the switched network. And don’t worry, even though you’re probably thinking, “Wait—

what are frames and packets?” I promise to completely fill you in later in this chapter. For now,
think of a packet as a package containing data.
Okay, so by default, switches break up collision domains, but what are these things? 
Collision
domain
 is an Ethernet term used to describe a network scenario in which one device sends a
packet out on a network segment and every other device on that same segment is forced to pay
attention no matter what. This isn’t very efficient because if a different device tries to transmit at
the same time, a collision will occur, requiring both devices to retransmit, one at a time—not
good! This happens a lot in a hub environment, where each host segment connects to a hub that
represents only one collision domain and a single broadcast domain. By contrast, each and every
port on a switch represents its own collision domain, allowing network traffic to flow much more
smoothly.
 Switches create separate collision domains within a single broadcast domain.
Routers provide a separate broadcast domain for each interface. Don’t let this ever confuse
you!
The term 
bridging
 was introduced before routers and switches were implemented, so it’s pretty
common to hear people referring to switches as bridges. That’s because bridges and 
switches
basically do the same thing—break up collision domains on a LAN. Note to self that you cannot
buy a physical bridge these days, only LAN switches, which use bridging technologies. This does
not mean that you won’t still hear Cisco and others refer to LAN switches as multiport bridges
now and then.
But does it mean that a switch is just a multiple-port bridge with more brainpower? Well, pretty
much, only there are still some key differences. Switches do provide a bridging function, but they
do that with greatly enhanced management ability and features. Plus, most bridges had only 2 or
4 ports, which is severely limiting. Of course, it was possible to get your hands on a bridge with
up to 16 ports, but that’s nothing compared to the hundreds of ports available on some switches!
 You would use a bridge in a network to reduce collisions within broadcast
domains and to increase the number of collision domains in your network. Doing this
provides more bandwidth for users. And never forget that using hubs in your Ethernet
network can contribute to congestion. As always, plan your network design carefully!
Figure 1.4
 shows how a network would look with all these internetwork devices in place.
Remember, a router doesn’t just break up broadcast domains for every LAN interface, it breaks
up collision domains too.

FIGURE 1.4
 
Internetworking devices
Looking at 
Figure 1.4
, did you notice that the router has the center stage position and connects
each physical network together? I’m stuck with using this layout because of the ancient bridges
and hubs involved. I really hope you don’t run across a network like this, but it’s still really
important to understand the strategic ideas that this figure represents!
See that bridge up at the top of our internetwork shown in 
Figure 1.4
? It’s there to connect the
hubs to a router. The bridge breaks up collision domains, but all the hosts connected to both
hubs are still crammed into the same broadcast domain. That bridge also created only three
collision domains, one for each port, which means that each device connected to a hub is in the
same collision domain as every other device connected to that same hub. This is really lame and
to be avoided if possible, but it’s still better than having one collision domain for all hosts! So
don’t do this at home; it’s a great museum piece and a wonderful example of what not to do, but
this inefficient design would be terrible for use in today’s networks! It does show us how far we’ve
come though, and again, the foundational concepts it illustrates are really important for you to
get.
And I want you to notice something else: The three interconnected hubs at the bottom of the
figure also connect to the router. This setup creates one collision domain and one broadcast
domain and makes that bridged network, with its two collision domains, look majorly better by
contrast!

 Don’t misunderstand… bridges/switches are used to segment networks, but they
will not isolate broadcast or multicast packets.
The best network connected to the router is the LAN switched network on the left. Why?
Because each port on that switch breaks up collision domains. But it’s not all good—all devices
are still in the same broadcast domain. Do you remember why this can be really bad? Because all
devices must listen to all broadcasts transmitted, that’s why! And if your broadcast domains are
too large, the users have less bandwidth and are required to process more broadcasts. Network
response time eventually will slow to a level that could cause riots and strikes, so it’s important to
keep your broadcast domains small in the vast majority of networks today.
Once there are only switches in our example network, things really change a lot! 
Figure 1.5
demonstrates a network you’ll typically stumble upon today.
FIGURE 1.5
 Switched networks creating an internetwork
Here I’ve placed the LAN switches at the center of this network world, with the router connecting
the logical networks. If I went ahead and implemented this design, I’ll have created something
called virtual LANs, or VLANs, which are used when you logically break up broadcast domains in
a layer 2, switched network. It’s really important to understand that even in a switched network
environment, you still need a router to provide communication between VLANs. Don’t forget
that!
Still, clearly the best network design is the one that’s perfectly configured to meet the business
requirements of the specific company or client it serves, and it’s usually one in which LAN
switches exist in harmony with routers strategically placed in the network. It’s my hope that this
book will help you understand the basics of routers and switches so you can make solid, informed
decisions on a case-by-case basis and be able to achieve that goal! But I digress…
So let’s go back to 
Figure 1.4
 now for a minute and really scrutinize it because I want to ask you
this question: How many collision domains and broadcast domains are really there in this
internetwork? I hope you answered nine collision domains and three broadcast domains! The
broadcast domains are definitely the easiest to spot because only routers break up broadcast
domains by default, and since there are three interface connections, that gives you three
broadcast domains. But do you see the nine collision domains? Just in case that’s a no, I’ll
explain. The all-hub network at the bottom is one collision domain; the bridge network on top
equals three collision domains. Add in the switch network of five collision domains—one for each

switch port—and you get a total of nine!
While we’re at this, in 
Figure 1.5
, each port on the switch is a separate collision domain, and each
VLAN would be a separate broadcast domain. So how many collision domains do you see here?
I’m counting 12—remember that connections between the switches are considered a collision
domain! Since the figure doesn’t show any VLAN information, we can assume the default of one
broadcast domain is in place.
Before we move on to Internetworking Models, let’s take a look at a few more network devices
that we’ll find in pretty much every network today as shown in 
Figure 1.6
.
FIGURE 1.6
 Other devices typically found in our internetworks today.
Taking off from the switched network in 
Figure 1.5
, you’ll find WLAN devices, including AP’s and
wireless controllers, and firewalls. You’d be hard pressed not to find these devices in your
networks today.
Let’s look closer at these devices:
WLAN devices: These devices connect wireless devices such as computers, printers, and
tablets to the network. Since pretty much every device manufactured today has a wireless
NIC, you just need to configure a basic access point (AP) to connect to a traditional wired
network.
Access Points or APs: These devices allow wireless devices to connect to a wired network and
extend a collision domain from a switch, and are typically in their own broadcast domain or
what we’ll refer to as a Virtual LAN (VLAN). An AP can be a simple standalone device, but
today they are usually managed by wireless controllers either in house or through the
internet.
WLAN Controllers: These are the devices that network administrators or network operations
centers use to manage access points in medium to large to extremely large quantities. The

WLAN controller automatically handles the configuration of wireless access points and was
typically used only in larger enterprise systems. However, with Cisco’s acquisition of Meraki
systems, you can easily manage a small to medium sized wireless network via the cloud using
their simple to configure web controller system.
Firewalls: These devices are network security systems that monitor and control the incoming
and outgoing network traffic based on predetermined security rules, and is usually an
Intrusion Protection System (IPS). Cisco Adaptive Security Appliance (ASA) firewall
typically establishes a barrier between a trusted, secure internal network and the Internet,
which is not secure or trusted. Cisco’s new acquisition of Sourcefire put them in the top of the
market with Next Generation Firewalls (NGFW) and Next Generation IPS (NGIPS), which
Cisco now just calls Firepower. Cisco new Firepower runs on dedicated appliances, Cisco’s
ASA’s, ISR routers and even on Meraki products.
Should I Replace My Existing 10/100 Mbps Switches?
Let’s say you’re a network administrator at a large company. The boss comes to you and
says that he got your requisition to buy a bunch of new switches but he’s really freaking out
about the price tag! Should you push it—do you really need to go this far?
Absolutely! Make your case and go for it because the newest switches add really huge
capacity to a network that older 10/100 Mbps switches just can’t touch. And yes, five-year-
old switches are considered pretty Pleistocene these days. But in reality, most of us just
don’t have an unlimited budget to buy all new gigabit switches; however, 10/100 switches
are just not good enough in today’s networks.
Another good question: Do you really need low-latency 1 Gbps or better switch ports for all
your users, servers, and other devices? Yes, you 
absolutely
 need new higher-end switches!
This is because servers and hosts are no longer the bottlenecks of our internetworks, our
routers and switches are—especially legacy ones. We now need gigabit on the desktop and
on every router interface; 10 Gbps is now the minimum between switch uplinks, so go to 40
or even 100 Gbps as uplinks if you can afford it.
Go ahead. Put in that requisition for all new switches. You’ll be a hero before long!
Okay, so now that you’ve gotten a pretty thorough introduction to internetworking and the
various devices that populate an internetwork, it’s time to head into exploring the
internetworking models.
Internetworking Models
First a little history: When networks first came into being, computers could typically
communicate only with computers from the same manufacturer. For example, companies ran
either a complete DECnet solution or an IBM solution, never both together. In the late 1970s, the
Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) reference model
 was created by the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) to break through this barrier.
The OSI model was meant to help vendors create interoperable network devices and software in
the form of protocols so that different vendor networks could work in peaceable accord with
each other. Like world peace, it’ll probably never happen completely, but it’s still a great goal!
Anyway the OSI model is the primary architectural model for networks. It describes how data
and network information are communicated from an application on one computer through the
network media to an application on another computer. The OSI reference model breaks this
approach into layers.
Coming up, I’ll explain the layered approach to you plus how we can use it to help us

troubleshoot our internetworks.
 Goodness! ISO, OSI, and soon you’ll hear about IOS! Just remember that the ISO
created the OSI and that Cisco created the Internetworking Operating System (IOS), which
is what this book is all-so-about.
The Layered Approach
Understand that a 
reference model
 is a conceptual blueprint of how communications should take
place. It addresses all the processes required for effective communication and divides them into
logical groupings called 
layers
. When a communication system is designed in this manner, it’s
known as a hierarchical or 
layered architecture
.
Think of it like this: You and some friends want to start a company. One of the first things you’ll
do is sort out every task that must be done and decide who will do what. You would move on to
determine the order in which you would like everything to be done with careful consideration of
how all your specific operations relate to each other. You would then organize everything into
departments (e.g., sales, inventory, and shipping), with each department dealing with its specific
responsibilities and keeping its own staff busy enough to focus on their own particular area of the
enterprise.
In this scenario, departments are a metaphor for the layers in a communication system. For
things to run smoothly, the staff of each department has to trust in and rely heavily upon those in
the others to do their jobs well. During planning sessions, you would take notes, recording the
entire process to guide later discussions and clarify standards of operation, thereby creating
your business blueprint—your own reference model.
And once your business is launched, your department heads, each armed with the part of the
blueprint relevant to their own department, will develop practical ways to implement their
distinct tasks. These practical methods, or protocols, will then be compiled into a standard
operating procedures manual and followed closely because each procedure will have been
included for different reasons, delimiting their various degrees of importance and
implementation. All of this will become vital if you form a partnership or acquire another
company because then it will be really important that the new company’s business model is
compatible with yours!
Models happen to be really important to software developers too. They often use a reference
model to understand computer communication processes so they can determine which functions
should be accomplished on a given layer. This means that if someone is creating a protocol for a
certain layer, they only need to be concerned with their target layer’s function. Software that
maps to another layer’s protocols and is specifically designed to be deployed there will handle
additional functions. The technical term for this idea is 
binding
. The communication processes
that are related to each other are bound, or grouped together, at a particular layer.
Advantages of Reference Models
The OSI model is hierarchical, and there are many advantages that can be applied to any layered
model, but as I said, the OSI model’s primary purpose is to allow different vendors’ networks to
interoperate.
Here’s a list of some of the more important benefits of using the OSI layered model:
It divides the network communication process into smaller and simpler components,
facilitating component development, design, and troubleshooting.
It allows multiple-vendor development through the standardization of network components.
It encourages industry standardization by clearly defining what functions occur at each layer

of the model.
It allows various types of network hardware and software to communicate.
It prevents changes in one layer from affecting other layers to expedite development.
The OSI Reference Model
One of best gifts the OSI specifications gives us is paving the way for the data transfer between
disparate hosts running different operating systems, like Unix hosts, Windows machines, Macs,
smartphones, and so on.
And remember, the OSI is a logical model, not a physical one. It’s essentially a set of guidelines
that developers can use to create and implement applications to run on a network. It also
provides a framework for creating and implementing networking standards, devices, and
internetworking schemes.
The OSI has seven different layers, divided into two groups. The top three layers define how the
applications within the end stations will communicate with each other as well as with users. The
bottom four layers define how data is transmitted end to end.
Figure 1.7
 shows the three upper layers and their functions.
FIGURE 1.7
 The upper layers
When looking at 
Figure 1.6
, understand that users interact with the computer at the Application
layer and also that the upper layers are responsible for applications communicating between
hosts. None of the upper layers knows anything about networking or network addresses because
that’s the responsibility of the four bottom layers.
In 
Figure 1.8
, which shows the four lower layers and their functions, you can see that it’s these
four bottom layers that define how data is transferred through physical media like wire, cable,
fiber optics, switches, and routers. These bottom layers also determine how to rebuild a data
stream from a transmitting host to a destination host’s application.


FIGURE 1.8
 The lower layers
The following network devices operate at all seven layers of the OSI model:
Network management stations (NMSs)
Web and application servers
Gateways (not default gateways)
Servers
Network hosts
Basically, the ISO is pretty much the Emily Post of the network protocol world. Just as Ms. Post
wrote the book setting the standards—or protocols—for human social interaction, the ISO
developed the OSI reference model as the precedent and guide for an open network protocol set.
Defining the etiquette of communication models, it remains the most popular means of
comparison for protocol suites today.
The OSI reference model has the following seven layers:
Application layer (layer 7)
Presentation layer (layer 6)
Session layer (layer 5)
Transport layer (layer 4)
Network layer (layer 3)
Data Link layer (layer 2)
Physical layer (layer 1)
Some people like to use a mnemonic to remember the seven layers, such as All People Seem To
Need Data Processing. 
Figure 1.9
 shows a summary of the functions defined at each layer of the
OSI model.
FIGURE 1.9
 OSI layer functions
I’ve separated the seven-layer model into three different functions: the upper layers, the middle
layers, and the bottom layers. The upper layers communicate with the user interface 
and
application, the middle layers do reliable communication and routing to a remote network, and
the bottom layers communicate to the local network.
With this in hand, you’re now ready to explore each layer’s function in detail!

The Application Layer
The 
Application layer
 of the OSI model marks the spot where users actually communicate to the
computer and comes into play only when it’s clear that access to the network will be needed soon.
Take the case of Internet Explorer (IE). You could actually uninstall every trace of networking
components like TCP/IP, the NIC card, and so on and still use IE to view a local HTML
document. But things would get ugly if you tried to do things like view a remote HTML document
that must be retrieved because IE and other browsers act on these types of requests by
attempting to access the Application layer. So basically, the Application layer is working as the
interface between the actual application program and the next layer down by providing ways for
the application to send information down through the protocol stack. This isn’t actually part of
the layered structure, because browsers don’t live in the Application layer, but they interface
with it as well as the relevant protocols when asked to access remote resources.
Identifying and confirming the communication partner’s availability and verifying the required
resources to permit the specified type of communication to take place also occurs at the
Application layer. This is important because, like the lion’s share of browser functions, computer
applications sometimes need more than desktop resources. It’s more typical than you would
think for the communicating components of several network applications to come together to
carry out a requested function. Here are a few good examples of these kinds of events:
File transfers
Email
Enabling remote access
Network management activities
Client/server processes
Information location
Many network applications provide services for communication over enterprise networks, but
for present and future internetworking, the need is fast developing to reach beyond the limits of
current physical networking.
 The Application layer works as the interface between actual application
programs. This means end-user programs like Microsoft Word don’t reside at the
Application layer, they interface with the Application layer protocols. Later, in Chapter 3,
“Introduction to TCP/IP,” I’ll talk in detail about a few important programs that actually
reside at the Application layer, like Telnet, FTP, and TFTP.
The Presentation Layer
The 
Presentation layer
 gets its name from its purpose: It presents data to the Application layer
and is responsible for data translation and code formatting. Think of it as the OSI model’s
translator, providing coding and conversion services. One very effective way of ensuring a
successful data transfer is to convert the data into a standard format before transmission.
Computers are configured to receive this generically formatted data and then reformat it back
into its native state to read it. An example of this type of translation service occurs when
translating old Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code (EBCDIC) data to ASCII, the
American Standard Code for Information Interchange (often pronounced “askee”). So just
remember that by providing translation services, the Presentation layer ensures that data
transferred from the Application layer of one system can be read by the Application layer of
another one.
With this in mind, it follows that the OSI would include protocols that define how standard data
should be formatted, so key functions like data compression, decompression, encryption, and

decryption are also associated with this layer. Some Presentation layer standards are involved in
multimedia operations as well.
The Session Layer
The 
Session layer
 is responsible for setting up, managing, and dismantling sessions between
Presentation layer entities and keeping user data separate. Dialog control between devices also
occurs at this layer.
Communication between hosts’ various applications at the Session layer, as from a client to a
server, is coordinated and organized via three different modes: 
simplex
, 
half-duplex
, and 
full-
duplex
. Simplex is simple one-way communication, kind of like saying something and not getting
a reply. Half-duplex is actual two-way communication, but it can take place in only one direction
at a time, preventing the interruption of the transmitting device. It’s like when pilots and ship
captains communicate over their radios, or even a walkie-talkie. But full-duplex is exactly like a
real conversation where devices can transmit and receive at the same time, much like two people
arguing or interrupting each other during a telephone conversation.
The Transport Layer
The 
Transport layer
 segments and reassembles data into a single data stream. Services located at
this layer take all the various data received from upper-layer applications, then combine it into
the same, concise data stream. These protocols provide end-to-end data transport services and
can establish a logical connection between the sending host and destination host on an
internetwork.
A pair of well-known protocols called TCP and UDP are integral to this layer, but no worries if
you’re not already familiar with them because I’ll bring you up to speed later, in Chapter 3. For
now, understand that although both work at the Transport layer, TCP is known as a reliable
service but UDP is not. This distinction gives application developers 
more options because they
have a choice between the two protocols when they are designing products for this layer.
The Transport layer is responsible for providing mechanisms for multiplexing upper-layer
applications, establishing sessions, and tearing down virtual circuits. It can also hide the details
of network-dependent information from the higher layers as well as provide transparent data
transfer.
 The term 
reliable networking
 can be used at the Transport layer. Reliable
networking requires that acknowledgments, sequencing, and flow control will all be used.
The Transport layer can be either connectionless or connection-oriented, but because Cisco
really wants you to understand the connection-oriented function of the Transport layer, I’m
going to go into that in more detail here.
Connection-Oriented Communication
For reliable transport to occur, a device that wants to transmit must first establish a connection-
oriented communication session with a remote device—its peer system—known as a 
call setup
 or
a 
three-way handshake
. Once this process is complete, the data transfer occurs, and when it’s
finished, a call termination takes place to tear down the virtual circuit.
Figure 1.10
 depicts a typical reliable session taking place between sending and receiving systems.
In it, you can see that both hosts’ application programs begin by notifying their individual
operating systems that a connection is about to be initiated. The two operating systems
communicate by sending messages over the network confirming that the transfer is approved
and that both sides are ready for it to take place. After all of this required synchronization takes
place, a connection is fully established and the data transfer begins. And by the way, it’s really

helpful to understand that this virtual circuit setup is often referred to as overhead!
FIGURE 1.10
 Establishing a connection-oriented session
Okay, now while the information is being transferred between hosts, the two machines
periodically check in with each other, communicating through their protocol software to ensure
that all is going well and that the data is being received properly.
Here’s a summary of the steps in the connection-oriented session—that three-way handshake—
pictured in 
Figure 1.9
:
The first “connection agreement” segment is a request for 
synchronization (SYN)
.
The next segments 
acknowledge (ACK)
 the request and establish connection parameters—the
rules—between hosts. These segments request that the receiver’s sequencing is synchronized
here as well so that a bidirectional connection can be formed.
The final segment is also an acknowledgment, which notifies the destination host that the
connection agreement has been accepted and that the actual connection has been established.
Data transfer can now begin.
Sounds pretty simple, but things don’t always flow so smoothly. Sometimes during a transfer,
congestion can occur because a high-speed computer is generating data traffic a lot faster than
the network itself can process it! And a whole bunch of computers simultaneously sending
datagrams through a single gateway or destination can also jam things up pretty badly. In the
latter case, a gateway or destination can become congested even though no single source caused

the problem. Either way, the problem is basically akin to a freeway bottleneck—too much traffic
for too small a capacity. It’s not usually one car that’s the problem; it’s just that there are way too
many cars on that freeway at once!
But what actually happens when a machine receives a flood of datagrams too quickly for it to
process? It stores them in a memory section called a 
buffer
. Sounds great; it’s just that this
buffering action can solve the problem only if the datagrams are part of a small burst. If the
datagram deluge continues, eventually exhausting the device’s memory, its flood capacity will be
exceeded and it will dump any and all additional datagrams it receives just like an inundated
overflowing bucket!
Flow Control
Since floods and losing data can both be tragic, we have a fail-safe solution in place known as
flow control
. Its job is to ensure data integrity at the Transport layer by allowing applications to
request reliable data transport between systems. Flow control prevents a sending host on one
side of the connection from overflowing the buffers in the receiving host. Reliable data transport
employs a connection-oriented communications session between systems, and the protocols
involved ensure that the following will be achieved:
The segments delivered are acknowledged back to the sender upon their reception.
Any segments not acknowledged are retransmitted.
Segments are sequenced back into their proper order upon arrival at their destination.
A manageable data flow is maintained in order to avoid congestion, overloading, or worse,
data loss.
 The purpose of flow control is to provide a way for the receiving device to
control the amount of data sent by the sender.
Because of the transport function, network flood control systems really work well. Instead of
dumping and losing data, the Transport layer can issue a “not ready” indicator to the sender, or
potential source of the flood. This mechanism works kind of like a stoplight, signaling the sending
device to stop transmitting segment traffic to its overwhelmed peer. After the peer receiver
processes the segments already in its memory reservoir—its buffer—it sends out a “ready”
transport indicator. When the machine waiting to transmit the rest of its datagrams receives this
“go” indicator, it resumes its transmission. The process is pictured in 
Figure 1.11
.

FIGURE 1.11
 Transmitting segments with flow control
In a reliable, connection-oriented data transfer, datagrams are delivered to the receiving host
hopefully in the same sequence they’re transmitted. A failure will occur if any data segments are
lost, duplicated, or damaged along the way—a problem solved by having the receiving host
acknowledge that it has received each and every data segment.
A service is considered connection-oriented if it has the following characteristics:
A virtual circuit, or “three-way handshake,” is set up.
It uses sequencing.
It uses acknowledgments.
It uses flow control.
 The types of flow control are buffering, windowing, and congestion avoidance.
Windowing
Ideally, data throughput happens quickly and efficiently. And as you can imagine, it would be

painfully slow if the transmitting machine had to actually wait for an acknowledgment after
sending each and every segment! The quantity of data segments, measured in bytes, that the
transmitting machine is allowed to send without receiving an acknowledgment is called a
window
.
 Windows are used to control the amount of outstanding, unacknowledged data
segments.
The size of the window controls how much information is transferred from one end to the other
before an acknowledgement is required. While some protocols quantify information depending
on the number of packets, TCP/IP measures it by counting the number of bytes.
As you can see in 
Figure 1.12
, there are two window sizes—one set to 1 and one set to 3.
FIGURE 1.12
 Windowing
If you’ve configured a window size of 1, the sending machine will wait for an acknowledgment for
each data segment it transmits before transmitting another one but will allow three to be
transmitted before receiving an acknowledgement if the window size is set to 3.

In this simplified example, both the sending and receiving machines are workstations. Remember
that in reality, the transmission isn’t based on simple numbers but in the amount of bytes that can
be sent!
 If a receiving host fails to receive all the bytes that it should acknowledge, the
host can improve the communication session by decreasing the window size.
Acknowledgments
Reliable data delivery ensures the integrity of a stream of data sent from one machine to the
other through a fully functional data link. It guarantees that the data won’t be duplicated or lost.
This is achieved through something called 
positive acknowledgment with retransmission
—a
technique that requires a receiving machine to communicate with the transmitting source by
sending an acknowledgment message back to the sender when it receives data. The sender
documents each segment measured in bytes, then sends and waits for this acknowledgment
before sending the next segment. Also important is that when it sends a segment, the transmitting
machine starts a timer and will retransmit if it expires before it gets an acknowledgment back
from the receiving end. 
Figure 1.13
 shows the process I just described.
FIGURE 1.13
 Transport layer reliable delivery
In the figure, the sending machine transmits segments 1, 2, and 3. The receiving node
acknowledges that it has received them by requesting segment 4 (what it is expecting next).

When it receives the acknowledgment, the sender then transmits segments 4, 5, and 6. If segment
5 doesn’t make it to the destination, the receiving node acknowledges that event with a request
for the segment to be re-sent. The sending machine will then resend the lost segment and wait for
an acknowledgment, which it must receive in order to move on to the transmission of segment 7.
The Transport layer, working in tandem with the Session layer, also separates the data from
different applications, an activity known as 
session multiplexing
, and it happens when a client
connects to a server with multiple browser sessions open. This is exactly what’s taking place
when you go someplace online like Amazon and click multiple links, opening them
simultaneously to get information when comparison shopping. The client data from each
browser session must be separate when the server application receives it, which is pretty slick
technologically speaking, and it’s the Transport layer to the rescue for that juggling act!
The Network Layer
The 
Network layer
, or layer 3, manages device addressing, tracks the location of devices on the
network, and determines the best way to move data. This means that it’s up to the Network layer
to transport traffic between devices that aren’t locally attached. Routers, which are layer 3
devices, are specified at this layer and provide the routing services within an internetwork.
Here’s how that works: first, when a packet is received on a router interface, the destination IP
address is checked. If the packet isn’t destined for that particular router, it will look up the
destination network address in the routing table. Once the router chooses an exit interface, the
packet will be sent to that interface to be framed and sent out on the local network. If the router
can’t find an entry for the packet’s destination network in the routing table, the router drops the
packet.
Data and route update packets are the two types of packets used at the Network layer:
Data Packets
 These are used to transport user data through the internetwork. Protocols used to
support data traffic are called routed protocols, and IP and IPv6 are key examples. I’ll cover IP
addressing in Chapter 3, “Introduction to TCP/IP,” and Chapter 4, “Easy Subnetting,” and I’ll
cover IPv6 in Chapter 14, “Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6).”
Route Update Packets
 These packets are used to update neighboring routers about the
networks connected to all routers within the internetwork. Protocols that send route update
packets are called routing protocols; the most critical ones for CCNA are RIPv2, EIGRP, and
OSPF. Route update packets are used to help build and maintain routing tables.
Figure 1.14
 shows an example of a routing table. The routing table each router keeps and refers
to includes the following information:


FIGURE 1.14
 Routing table used in a router
Network Addresses
 Protocol-specific network addresses. A router must maintain a routing
table for individual routing protocols because each routed protocol keeps track of a network
with a different addressing scheme. For example, the routing tables for IP and IPv6 are
completely different, so the router keeps a table for each one. Think of it as a street sign in each
of the different languages spoken by the American, Spanish, and French people living on a street;
the street sign would read Cat/Gato/Chat.
Interface
 The exit interface a packet will take when destined for a specific network.
Metric
 The distance to the remote network. Different routing protocols use different ways of
computing this distance. I’m going to cover routing protocols thoroughly in Chapter 9, “IP
Routing.” For now, know that some routing protocols like the Routing Information Protocol, or
RIP, use hop count, which refers to the number of routers a packet passes through en route to a
remote network. Others use bandwidth, delay of the line, or even tick count (1/18 of a second) to
determine the best path for data to get to a given destination.
And as I mentioned earlier, routers break up broadcast domains, which means that by default,
broadcasts aren’t forwarded through a router. Do you remember why this is a good thing?
Routers also break up collision domains, but you can also do that using layer 2 (Data Link layer)
switches. Because each interface in a router represents a separate network, it must be assigned
unique network identification numbers, and each host on the network connected to that router
must use the same network number. 
Figure 1.15
 shows how a router works in an internetwork.
FIGURE 1.15
 A router in an internetwork. Each router LAN interface is a broadcast domain.
Routers break up broadcast domains by default and provide WAN services.
Here are some router characteristics that you should never forget:
Routers, by default, will not forward any broadcast or multicast packets.
Routers use the logical address in a Network layer header to determine the next-hop router to
forward the packet to.
Routers can use access lists, created by an administrator, to control security based on the
types of packets allowed to enter or exit an interface.
Routers can provide layer 2 bridging functions if needed and can simultaneously route
through the same interface.
Layer 3 devices—in this case, routers—provide connections between 
virtual LANs (VLANs)
.
Routers can provide 
quality of service (QoS)
 for specific types of network traffic.
The Data Link Layer
The 
Data Link layer
 provides for the physical transmission of data and handles error
notification, network topology, and flow control. This means that the Data Link layer will ensure
that messages are delivered to the proper device on a LAN using hardware addresses and will
translate messages from the Network layer into bits for the Physical layer to transmit.
The Data Link layer formats the messages, each called a 
data frame
, and adds a customized
header containing the hardware destination and source address. This added information forms a
sort of capsule that surrounds the original message in much the same way that engines,

navigational devices, and other tools were attached to the lunar modules of the Apollo project.
These various pieces of equipment were useful only during certain stages of space flight and were
stripped off the module and discarded when their designated stage was completed. The process
of data traveling through networks is similar.
Figure 1.16
 shows the Data Link layer with the Ethernet and IEEE specifications. When you
check it out, notice that the IEEE 802.2 standard is used in conjunction with and adds
functionality to the other IEEE standards. (You’ll read more about the important IEEE 802
standards used with the Cisco objectives in Chapter 2, “Ethernet Networking and Data
Encapsulation.”)
FIGURE 1.16
 Data Link layer
It’s important for you to understand that routers, which work at the Network layer, don’t care at
all about where a particular host is located. They’re only concerned about where networks are
located and the best way to reach them—including remote ones. Routers are totally obsessive
when it comes to networks, which in this case is a good thing! It’s the Data Link layer that’s
responsible for the actual unique identification of each device that resides on a local network.
For a host to send packets to individual hosts on a local network as well as transmit packets
between routers, the Data Link layer uses hardware addressing. Each time a packet is sent
between routers, it’s framed with control information at the Data Link layer, but that information
is stripped off at the receiving router and only the original packet is left completely intact. This
framing of the packet continues for each hop until the packet is finally delivered to the correct
receiving host. It’s really important to understand that the packet itself is never altered along the
route; it’s only encapsulated with the type of control information required for it to be properly
passed on to the different media types.
The IEEE Ethernet Data Link layer has two sublayers:
Media Access Control (MAC)
 Defines how packets are placed on the media. Contention for
media access is “first come/first served” access where everyone shares the same bandwidth—
hence the name. Physical addressing is defined here as well as logical topologies. What’s a logical
topology? It’s the signal path through a physical topology. Line discipline, error notification (but
not correction), the ordered delivery of frames, and optional flow control can also be used at this
sublayer.
Logical Link Control (LLC)
 Responsible for identifying Network layer protocols and then
encapsulating them. An LLC header tells the Data Link layer what to do with a packet once a
frame is received. It works like this: a host receives a frame and looks in the LLC header to find
out where the packet is destined—for instance, the IP protocol at the Network layer. The LLC can
also provide flow control and sequencing of control bits.
The switches and bridges I talked about near the beginning of the chapter both work at the Data
Link layer and filter the network using hardware (MAC) addresses. I’ll talk about these next.

 As data is encoded with control information at each layer of the OSI model, the
data is named with something called a protocol data unit (PDU). At the Transport layer, the
PDU is called a segment, at the Network layer it’s a packet, at the Data Link a frame, and at
the Physical layer it’s called bits. This method of naming the data at each layer is covered
thoroughly in Chapter 2.
Switches and Bridges at the Data Link Layer
Layer 2 switching is considered hardware-based bridging because it uses specialized hardware
called an 
application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)
. ASICs can run up to high gigabit speeds
with very low latency rates.
 
Latency
 is the time measured from when a frame enters a port to when it exits a
port.
Bridges and switches read each frame as it passes through the network. The layer 2 device then
puts the source hardware address in a filter table and keeps track of which port the frame was
received on. This information (logged in the bridge’s or switch’s filter table) is what helps the
machine determine the location of the specific sending device. 
Figure 1.17
 shows a switch in an
internetwork and how John is sending packets to the Internet and Sally doesn’t hear his frames
because she is in a different collision domain. The destination frame goes directly to the default
gateway router, and Sally doesn’t see John’s traffic, much to her relief.

FIGURE 1.17
 A switch in an internetwork
The real estate business is all about location, location, location, and it’s the same way for both
layer 2 and layer 3 devices. Though both need to be able to negotiate the network, it’s crucial to
remember that they’re concerned with very different parts of it. Primarily, layer 3 machines
(such as routers) need to locate specific networks, whereas layer 2 machines (switches and
bridges) need to eventually locate specific devices. So, networks are to routers as individual
devices are to switches and bridges. And routing tables that “map” the internetwork are for
routers as filter tables that “map” individual devices are for switches and bridges.
After a filter table is built on the layer 2 device, it will forward frames only to the segment where
the destination hardware address is located. If the destination device is on the same segment as
the frame, the layer 2 device will block the frame from going to any other segments. If the
destination is on a different segment, the frame can be transmitted only to that segment. This is
called 
transparent bridging
.
When a switch interface receives a frame with a destination hardware address that isn’t found in
the device’s filter table, it will forward the frame to all connected segments. If the unknown
device that was sent the “mystery frame” replies to this forwarding action, the switch updates its
filter table regarding that device’s location. But in the event the destination address of the
transmitting frame is a broadcast address, the switch will forward all broadcasts to every
connected segment by default.
All devices that the broadcast is forwarded to are considered to be in the same broadcast domain.
This can be a problem because layer 2 devices propagate layer 2 broadcast storms that can
seriously choke performance, and the only way to stop a broadcast storm from propagating

through an internetwork is with a layer 3 device—a router!
The biggest benefit of using switches instead of hubs in your internetwork is that each switch port
is actually its own collision domain. Remember that a hub creates one large collision domain,
which is not a good thing! But even armed with a switch, you still don’t get to just break up
broadcast domains by default because neither switches nor bridges will do that. They’ll simply
forward all broadcasts instead.
Another benefit of LAN switching over hub-centered implementations is that each device on
every segment plugged into a switch can transmit simultaneously. Well, at least they can as long
as there’s only one host on each 
port and there isn’t a hub plugged into a switch port! As you
might have guessed, this is because hubs allow only one device per network segment to
communicate at a time.
The Physical Layer
Finally arriving at the bottom, we find that the 
Physical layer
 does two things: it sends bits and
receives bits. Bits come only in values of 1 or 0—a Morse code with numerical values. The
Physical layer communicates directly with the various types of actual communication media.
Different kinds of media represent these bit values in different ways. Some use audio tones, while
others employ 
state transitions
—changes in voltage from high to low and low to high. Specific
protocols are needed for each type of media to describe the proper bit patterns to be used, how
data is encoded into media signals, and the various qualities of the physical media’s attachment
interface.
The Physical layer specifies the electrical, mechanical, procedural, and functional requirements
for activating, maintaining, and deactivating a physical link between end systems. This layer is
also where you identify the interface between the 
data terminal equipment (DTE)
 and the 
data
communication equipment (DCE)
. (Some old phone-company employees still call DCE “data
circuit-terminating equipment.”) The DCE is usually located at the service provider, while the
DTE is the attached device. The services available to the DTE are most often accessed via a
modem or 
channel service unit/data service unit (CSU/DSU)
.
The Physical layer’s connectors and different physical topologies are defined by the OSI as
standards, allowing disparate systems to communicate. The Cisco exam objectives are interested
only in the IEEE Ethernet standards.
Hubs at the Physical Layer
A hub is really a multiple-port repeater. A repeater receives a digital signal, reamplifies or
regenerates that signal, then forwards the signal out the other port without looking at any data. A
hub does the same thing across all active ports: any digital signal received from a segment on a
hub port is regenerated or reamplified and transmitted out all other ports on the hub. This means
all devices plugged into a hub are in the same collision domain as well as in the same broadcast
domain. 
Figure 1.18
 shows a hub in a network and how when one host transmits, all other hosts
must stop and listen.

FIGURE 1.18
 A hub in a network
Hubs, like repeaters, don’t examine any of the traffic as it enters or before it’s transmitted out to
the other parts of the physical media. And every device connected to the hub, or hubs, must
listen if a device transmits. A physical star network, where the hub is a central device and cables
extend in all directions out from it, is the type of topology a hub creates. Visually, the design
really does resemble a star, whereas Ethernet networks run a logical bus topology, meaning that
the signal has to run through the network from end to end.
 Hubs and repeaters can be used to enlarge the area covered by a single LAN
segment, but I really do not recommend going with this configuration! LAN switches are
affordable for almost every situation and will make you much happier.
Topologies at the Physical layer
One last thing I want to discuss at the Physical layer is topologies, both physical and logical.
Understand that every type of network has both a physical and a logical topology.
The physical topology of a network refers to the physical layout of the devices, but mostly
the cabling and cabling layout.
The logical topology defines the logical path on which the signal will travel on the physical
topology.
Figure 1.19
 shows the four types of topologies.

FIGURE 1.19
 Physical vs. Logical Topolgies
Here are the topology types, although the most common, and pretty much the only network we
use today is a physical star, logical bus technology, which is considered a hybrid topology (think
Ethernet):
Bus: In a bus topology, every workstation is connected to a single cable, meaning every host
is directly connected to every other workstation in the network.
Ring: In a ring topology, computers and other network devices are cabled together in a way
that the last device is connected to the first to form a circle or ring.
Star: The most common physical topology is a star topology, which is your Ethernet
switching physical layout. A central cabling device (switch) connects the computers and other
network devices together. This category includes star and extended star topologies. Physical
connection is commonly made using twisted-pair wiring.
 Mesh: In a mesh topology, every network device is cabled together with connection to each
other. Redundant links increase reliability and self-healing. The physical connection is
commonly made using fiber or twisted-pair wiring.
Hybrid: Ethernet uses a physical star layout (cables come from all directions), and the signal
travels end-to-end, like a bus route.
Summary
Whew! I know this seemed like the chapter that wouldn’t end, but it did—and you made it
through! You’re now armed with a ton of fundamental information; you’re ready to build upon it
and are well on your way to certification.
I started by discussing simple, basic networking and the differences between collision and
broadcast domains.
I then discussed the OSI model—the seven-layer model used to help application developers
design applications that can run on any type of system or network. Each layer has its special jobs
and select responsibilities within the model to ensure that solid, effective communications do, in
fact, occur. I provided you with complete details of each layer and discussed how Cisco views the
specifications of the OSI model.
In addition, each layer in the OSI model specifies different types of devices, and I described the
different devices used at each layer.
Remember that hubs are Physical layer devices and repeat the digital signal to all segments
except the one from which it was received. Switches segment the network using hardware
addresses and break up collision domains. Routers break up broadcast domains as well as
collision domains and use logical addressing to send packets through an internetwork.

Exam Essentials
Identify the possible causes of LAN traffic congestion.
 Too many hosts in a broadcast
domain, broadcast storms, multicasting, and low bandwidth are all possible causes of LAN traffic
congestion.
Describe the difference between a collision domain and a broadcast domain.
Collision domain
 is an Ethernet term used to describe a network collection of devices in which
one particular device sends a packet on a network segment, forcing every other device on that
same segment to pay attention to it. With a broadcast domain, a set of all devices on a network
hears all broadcasts sent on all segments.
Differentiate a MAC address and an IP address and describe how and when each
address type is used in a network.
 A MAC address is a hexadecimal number identifying the
physical connection of a host. MAC addresses are said to operate on layer 2 of the OSI model. IP
addresses, which can be expressed in binary or decimal format, are logical identifiers that are
said to be on layer 3 of the OSI model. Hosts on the same physical segment locate one
 another
with MAC addresses, while IP addresses are used when they reside on different LAN segments or
subnets.
Understand the difference between a hub, a bridge, a switch, and a router.
 A hub
creates one collision domain and one broadcast domain. A bridge breaks up collision domains
but creates one large broadcast domain. They use hardware addresses to filter the network.
Switches are really just multiple-port bridges with more intelligence; they break up collision
domains but create one large broadcast domain by default. Bridges and switches use hardware
addresses to filter the network. Routers break up broadcast domains (and collision domains) and
use logical addressing to filter the network.
Identify the functions and advantages of routers.
 Routers perform packet switching,
filtering, and path selection, and they facilitate internetwork communication. One advantage of
routers is that they reduce broadcast traffic.
Differentiate connection-oriented and connectionless network services and
describe how each is handled during network communications.
 Connection-oriented
services use acknowledgments and flow control to create a reliable session. More overhead is
used than in a connectionless network service. Connectionless services are used to send data with
no acknowledgments or flow control. This is considered unreliable.
Define the OSI layers, understand the function of each, and describe how devices
and networking protocols can be mapped to each layer.
 You must remember the seven
layers of the OSI model and what function each layer provides. The Application, Presentation,
and Session layers are upper layers and are responsible for communicating from a user interface
to an application. The Transport layer provides segmentation, sequencing, and virtual circuits.
The Network layer provides logical network addressing and routing through an internetwork.
The Data Link layer provides framing and placing of data on the network medium. The Physical
layer is responsible for taking 1s and 0s and encoding them into a digital signal for transmission
on the network segment.
Written Labs
In this section, you’ll complete the following labs to make sure you’ve got the information and
concepts contained within them fully dialed in:
Lab 1.1: OSI Questions
Lab 1.2: Defining the OSI Layers and Devices
Lab 1.3: Identifying Collision and Broadcast Domains
You can find the answers to these labs in Appendix A, “Answers to Written Labs.”

Written Lab 1.1: OSI Questions
Answer the following questions about the OSI model:
1
. 
Which layer chooses and determines the availability of communicating partners along with
the resources necessary to make the connection, coordinates partnering 
applications, and
forms a consensus on procedures for controlling data integrity and error recovery?
2
. 
Which layer is responsible for converting data packets from the Data Link layer into electrical
signals?
3
. 
At which layer is routing implemented, enabling connections and path selection between two
end systems?
4
. 
Which layer defines how data is formatted, presented, encoded, and converted for use on the
network?
5
. 
Which layer is responsible for creating, managing, and terminating sessions between
applications?
6
. 
Which layer ensures the trustworthy transmission of data across a physical link and is
primarily concerned with physical addressing, line discipline, network topology, error
notification, ordered delivery of frames, and flow control?
7
. 
Which layer is used for reliable communication between end nodes over the network and
provides mechanisms for establishing, maintaining, and terminating virtual circuits;
transport-fault detection and recovery; and controlling the flow of information?
8
. 
Which layer provides logical addressing that routers will use for path determination?
9
. 
Which layer specifies voltage, wire speed, and cable pinouts and moves bits between devices?
10
. 
Which layer combines bits into bytes and bytes into frames, uses MAC addressing, and
provides error detection?
11
. 
Which layer is responsible for keeping the data from different applications separate on the
network?
12
. 
Which layer is represented by frames?
13
. 
Which layer is represented by segments?
14
. 
Which layer is represented by packets?
15
. 
Which layer is represented by bits?
16
. 
Rearrange the following in order of encapsulation:
Packets
Frames
Bits
Segments
17
. 
Which layer segments and reassembles data into a data stream?
18
. 
Which layer provides the physical transmission of the data and handles error notification,
network topology, and flow control?
19
. 
Which layer manages logical device addressing, tracks the location of devices on the
internetwork, and determines the best way to move data?
20
. 
What is the bit length and expression form of a MAC address?
Written Lab 1.2: Defining the OSI Layers and Devices
Fill in the blanks with the appropriate layer of the OSI or hub, switch, or router device.
Description
Device or OSI


[Note: PDF has 899 pages, only first 100 pages extracted]